IN delivering my son from me, I bury a second husband.


And I in going Madam, weep ore my fathers death anew; but I must attend his
majesty's command, to whom I am now in Ward, evermore in subjection


You shall find of the King a husband Madame, you sir a father. He that so
generally is at all times good, must of necessity hold his virtue to you,
whose worthiness would stir it up where it wanted rather then lack it where
there is such abundance


What hope is there of his Majesty's amendment?


He has abandoned his Physicians Madam, under whose practices he has
persecuted time with hope, and finds no other advantage in the process, but
only the loosing of hope by time


This young Gentlewoman had a father, O that had, how sad a passage it is, whose
skill was almost as great as his honesty, had it stretched so far, would have
made nature immortal, and death should have play for lack of work. Would for
the Kings sake he were living, I think it would be the death of the Kings
disease


How called you the man you speak of Madam?


He was famous sir in his profession, and it was his great right to be so:
Gerard de Narbon


He was excellent indeed Madam, the King very lately spoke of him admiringly,
and mourningly: he was skillful enough to have lived still, if knowledge could
be set up against mortallitie


What is it (my good Lord) the King languishes of?


A Fistula my Lord.


I heard not of it before.


I would it were not notorious. Was this Gentlewoman the Daughter of Gerard de
Narbon


His sole child my Lord, and bequeathed to my over looking. I have those hopes
of her good, that her education promises her dispositions she inherits, which
makes fair gifts fairer: for where an unclean mind carries virtuous
qualities, there commendations go with pity, they are virtues and traitors
too: in her they are the better for their simpleness; she deriues her
honesty, and atcheeues her goodness


Your commendations Madam get from her tears.


It Is the best brine a Maiden can season her praise in. The remembrance of her
father never approches her heart, but the tirrany of her sorrows takes all
liuelihood from her cheek. No more of this Helena, go too, no more least it be
rather thought you affect a sorrow, then to have --


I do affect a sorrow indeed, but I have it too.


Moderate lamentation is the right of the dead, excessive grief the enemy to
the living


If the living be enemy to the grief, the excess makes it soon mortal.


Maddam I desire your holy wishes.


How understand we that?


Be thou blessed Bertrame, and succeed thy father
In manners as in shape: thy blood and virtue
Contend for Empire in thee, and thy goodness
Share with thy birthright. Love all, trust a few,
Do wrong to none: be able for thine enemy
Rather in power then use: and keep thy friend
Under thy own life's key. Be checked for silence,
But never taxed for speech. What heaven more will,
That thee may furnish, and my prayers pluck down,
Fall on thy head. Farewell my Lord,
It Is an vnseason'd Courtier, good my Lord
Advise him.

He cannot want the best
That shall attend his love.

Heaven bless him: Farewell Bertram.


The best wishes that can be forged in your thoghts be servants to you: be
comfortable to my mother, your Mistress, and make much of her


Farewell pretty Lady, you must hold the credit of your father.


O were that all, I think not on my father,
And these great tears grace his remembrance more
Then those I shed for him. What was he like?
I have forgott him. My imagination
Carries no favor in it but Bertrams.
I am undone, there is no living, none,
If Bertram be away. 'Twere all one,
That I should love a bright particular star,
And think to wed it, he is so above me
In his bright radience and colaterall light,
Must I be comforted, not in his sphere;
The ambition in my love thus plagues it self:
The hind that would be mated by the Lion
Must die for love. 'Twas pretty, though a plague
To see him every hour to sit and draw
His arched brows, his hawking eye, his curles
In our hearts table: heart too capeable
Of every line and trick of his sweet favor.
But now he is gone, and my idolatrous fancy
Must sanctify his Relics. Who comes here?
One that goes with him: I love him for his sake,
And yet I know him a notorious Liar,
Think him a great way fool, solie a coward,
Yet these fixed evils sit so fit in him,
That they take place, when Virtues steely bones
Looks bleake in th cold wind: withal, full often we see
Cold wisdom waighting on superfluous folly.

Save you fair Queen.


And you Monarch.


No.


And no.


Are you meditating on virginity?


If you have some stain of soldier in you: Let me ask you a question. Man
is enemy to virginity, how may we barracado it against him


Keep him out.


But he assailes, and our virginity though valiant, in the defense yet is
weak: unfold to us some warlike resistance


There is none: Man setting down before you, will undermine you, and blow you
up


Bless our poor Virginity from underminers and blowers up. Is there no
Military policy how Virgins might blow up men


Virginity being blown down, Man will quicklier be blown up: marry in
blowing him down again, with the breach your selves made, you lose your
City. It is not politic, in the Commonwealth of Nature, to preserve
virginity. Loss of Virginity, is rational increase, and there was never
Virgin go, till virginity was first lost. That you were made of, is metal
to make Virgins. Virginity, by being once lost, may be ten times found: by
being ever kept, it is ever lost: it is too cold a companion: Away with it


I will stand for it a little, though therefore I die a Virgin.


There Is little can be said in it, it is against the rule of Nature. To speak
on the part of virginity, is to accuse your Mothers; which is most infallible
disobedience. He that hangs himself is a Virgin: Virginity murders it self,
and should be buried in highwayes out of all sanctified limit, as a desperate
Offendresse against Nature. Virginity breeds mites, much like a Cheese,
consumes it self to the very payring, and so dies with feeding his own
stomach. Besides, Virginity is peevish, proud, idle, made of self-love,
which is the most inhibited sin in the Cannon. Keep it not, you cannot
choose but loose by it. Out with it: within ten year it will make it self two,
which is a goodly increase, and the principal it self not much the worse.
Away with it


How might one do sir, to loose it to her own liking?


Let me see. Marry ill, to like him that never it likes. It Is a commodity will
lose the gloss with lying: The longer kept, the less worth: Off with it while
it is vendible. Answer the time of request, Virginity like an old Courtier,
wears her cap out of fashion, richly suited, but vnsuteable, just like the
brooch and the toothpick, which were not now: your Date is better in your Pie
and your Porredge, then in your cheek: and your virginity, your old virginity,
is like one of our French withered pears, it looks ill, it eats drily, marry
it is a withered pear: it was formerly better, marry yet it is a withered pear:
Will you any thing with it


Not my virginity yet:
There shall your Master have a thousand loves,
A Mother, and a Mistress, and a friend,
A Phoenix, Captain, and an enemy*
A guide, a Goddess, and a Sovereign,
A Counselor, a Traitoresse, and a Dear:
His humble ambition, proud humility:
His iarring, concord: and his discord, dulcet:
His faith, his sweet disaster: with a world
Of pretty fond adoptious christendomes
That blinking Cupid gossips. Now shall he:
I know not what he shall, God send him well,
The Courts a learning place, and he is one.

What one in faith?


That I wish well, it is pity.


What Is pity?


That wishing well had not a body in it,
Which might be felt, that we the poorer borne,
Whose baser stars do shut us up in wishes,
Might with effects of them follow our friends,
And show what we alone must think, which never
Returns us thanks.

Monsieur Parrolles,
My Lord calls for you.

Little Hellen farewell, if I can remember thee, I will think of thee at Court.


Monsieur Parolles, you were borne under a charitable star.


Under Mars I.


I especially think, under Mars.


Why under Mars?


The wars has so kept you under, that you must needs be borne under Mars.


When he was predominant.


When he was retrograde I think rather.


Why think you so?


You go so much backward when you fight.


That Is for advantage.


So is running away,
When fear proposes the safety:
But the composition that your valor and fear makes in you, is a virtue of a
good wing, and I like the wear well


I am so full of businesses, I cannot answer thee acutely: I will return
perfect Courtier, in the which my instruction shall serve to naturalize thee,
so thou will be capeable of a Courtiers council, and understand what advice
shall thrust upon thee, else thou die in thine unthankfulness, and thine
ignorance makes thee away, farewell: When thou have leisure, say thy prayers:
when thou have none, remember thy Friends: Get thee a good husband, and use him
as he uses thee: So farewell


Our remedies often in our selves do lie,
Which we ascribe to heaven: the fated sky
Gives us free scope, only does backward pull
Our slow designs, when we our selves are dull.
What power is it, which mounts my love so hye,
That makes me see, and cannot feed mine eye?
The mightiest space in fortune, Nature brings
To join like, likes; and kiss like native things.
Impossible be strange attempts to those
That weigh their pains in sense, and do suppose
What has been, cannot be. Who ever strove
To show her merit, that did miss her love?
(The Kings disease) my project may deceive me,
But my intents are fixed, and will not leave me.

The Florentines and Senoys are by the ears,
Have fought with equal fortune, and continue
A brauing war.

So it is reported sir.


Nay it is most credible, we here receive it,
A certainty vouched from our Cousin Austria,
With caution, that the Florentine will move us
For speedy aid: wherein our dearest friend
Preiudicates the business, and would seem
To have us make denial.

His love and wisdom
Approved so to your Majesty, may plead
For amplest credence.

He has armed our answer,
And Florence is deni'de before he comes:
Yet for our Gentlemen that mean to see
The Tuscan service, freely have they leave
To stand on either part.

It well may serve
A nursserie to our Gentry, who are sick
For breathing, and exploit.

What Is he comes here.


It is the Count Rosignoll my good Lord,
Young Bertram.

Youth, thou bear thy Fathers face,
Frank Nature rather curious then in have
Has well composed thee: Thy Fathers moral parts
May thou inherit too: Welcome to Paris.

My thanks and duty are your Majesty's.


I would I had that corporal soundness now,
As when thy father, and my self, in friendship
First tried out souldiership: he did look far
Into the service of the time, and was
Discipled of the brauest. He lasted long,
But on us both did haggish Age steal on,
And wore us out of act: It much repaires me
To talk of your good father; in his youth
He had the wit, which I can well observe
To day in our young Lords: but they may jest
Till their own scorn return to them unnoted
Ere they can hide their leuitie in honor:
So like a Courtier, contempt nor bitterness
Were in his pride, or sharpness; if they were,
His equal had awaked them, and his honor
Clock to it self, knew the true minute when
Exception bid him speak: and at this time
His tongue obey d his hand. Who were below him,
He used as creatures of another place,
And bowed his eminent top to their low ranks,
Making them proud of his humility,
In their poor praise he humbled: Such a man
Might be a copy to these younger times;
Which followed well, would demonstrate them now
But goers backward.

His good remembrance sir
Lies richer in your thoughts, then on his tomb:
So in approofe lives not his Epitaph,
As in your royal speech.

Would I were with him he would always say,
(Me thinks I hear him now) his plausiue words
He scattered not in ears, but grafted them
To grow there and to bear: Let me not live,
This his good melancholy often began
On the Catastrophe and heel of pastime
When it was out: Let me not live (quoth he)
After my flame lackes oil, to be the snuff
Of younger spirits, whose apprehensiue senses
All but new things disdain; whose judgments are
Mere fathers of their garments: whose constancies
Expire before their fashions: this he wished.
I after him, do after him wish too:
Since I nor wax nor honey can bring home,
I quickly were dissolved from my hiue
To give some Laborers room.

You Are loved Sir,
They that least lend it you, shall lack you first.

I fill a place I know it: how long is it Count
Since the Physician at your fathers died?
He was much famed.

Some six months since my Lord.


If he were living, I would try him yet.
Lend me an arm: the rest have worn me out
With several applications: Nature and sickness
Debate it at their leisure. Welcome Count,
My sonne's no deerer.

Thank your Majesty.


I will now hear, what say you of this gentlewoman.


Maddam the care I have had to even your content, I wish might be found in the
Calendar of my past endeavors, for then we wound our Modesty, and make foul
the clearness of our deseruings, whenof our selves we publish them


What does this knave here? Get you gone sir: the complaints I have heard
of you I do not all believe, it is my slownesse that I do not: For I know you
lack not folly to commit them, and have ability enough to make such knaueries
yours


It Is not unknown to you Madam, I am a poor fellow.


Well sir.


No maddam,
It Is not so well that I am poor, though many of the rich are damned, but if
I may have your Ladyships good will to go to the world, Isbell the woman and w
will do as we may

Will thou needs be a beggar?


I do beg your good will in this case.


In what case?


In Isbels case and mine own: service is no heritage, and I think I shall
never have the blessing of God, till I have issue a my body: for they say
barnes are blessings


Tell me thy reason why thou will marry?


My poor body Madam requires it, I am driven onby the flesh, and he must
needs go that the devil drives


Is this all your worships reason?


Faith Madam I have other holy reasons, such as they are.


May the world know them?


I have been Madam a wicked creature, as you and all flesh and blood are, and
indeed I do marry that I may repent


Thy marriage sooner then thy wickedness.


I am out a friends Madam, and I hope to have friends for my wives sake.


Such friends are thine enemies knave.


Y' are shallow Madam in great friends, for the knaves come to do that for me
which I am a weary of: he that eres my Land, spares my teame, and gives me
leave to Inn the crop: if I be his cuckold he is my drudge; he that comforts
my wife, is the cherisher of my flesh and blood; he that cherishes my flesh
and blood, loves my flesh and blood; he that loves my flesh and blood is my
friend: ergo, he that kisses my wife is my friend: if men could be contented to
be what they are, there were no fear in marriage, for young Charbon the
Puritan, and old Poysam the Papist, how somere their hearts are seuer'd in
Religion, their heads are both one, they may ioule horns together like any
Dear in th Herd


Will thou ever be a foul mouthed and calumnious knave?


A Prophet I Madam, and I speak the truth the next way, for I the Ballad will
repeat, which men full true shall find, your marriage comes by destiny, your
Cuckoo sings by kind


Get you gone sir, I Will talk with you more anon.


May it please you Madam, that he bid Hellen come to you, of her I am to
speak


Sir tell my gentlewoman I would speak with her, Hellen I mean.


Was this fair face the cause, quoth she,
Why the Grecians sacked Troy,
Fond done, done, fond was this King Priams joy,
With that she sighed as she stood, bis
And gave this sentence then, among nine bad if one be good, among nine bad if
one be good, there is yet one good in ten


What, one good in ten? you corrupt the song sir.


One good woman in ten Madam, which is a purifying ath' song: would God would
serve the world so all the year, weed find no fault with the tithe woman if I
were the Parson, one in ten quoth a? and we might have a good woman borne but
ore every blazing star, or at an earthquake, 'twould mend the Lotterie well,
a man may draw his heart out ere a pluck one


You Will begone sir knave* and do as I command you?


That man should be at woman's command, and yet no hurt done, though honesty be
no Puritan, yet it will do no hurt, it will wear the Surplis of humility
over the blacke-Gowne of a big heart: I am going forsooth, the business is
for Helen to come hither


Well now.


I know Madam you love your Gentlewoman entirely.


Faith I do: her Father bequeathed her to me, and she her self without other
advantage, may lawfully make title to as much love as she finds, there is
more owing her then is paid, and more shall be paid her then she will demand


Madam, I was very late more near her then I think she wished me, alone
she was, and did communicate to her self her own words to her own ears,
she thought, I dare vow for her, they touched not any stranger sense, her
matter was, she loved your Son; Fortune she said was no goddess, that had
put such difference betwixt their two estates: Love no god, that would not
extend his might only, where qualities were level, Queen of Virgins, that
would suffer her poor Knight surprised without rescue in the first assault or
ransom afterward: This she delivered in the most bitter touch of sorrow that
ere I heard Virgin exclaim in, which I held my duty speedily to acquaint you
withal, sithence in the loss that may happen, it concerns you something to
know it


You have discharged this honestly, keep it to your self, many likelihoods
informed me of this before, which hung so tottring in the balance, that I
could neither believe nor misdoubt: pray you leave me, stall this in your
bosom, and I thank you for your honest care: I will speak with you further
anon


Even so it was with me when I was young:
If ever we are natures, these are ours, this thorn
Does to our Rose of youth righlie belong
Our blood to us, this to our blood is borne,
It is the show, and seal of natures truth,
Where loves strong passion is impressed in youth,
By our remembrances of days forgon,
Such were our faults, or then we thought them none,
Her eye is sick on it, I observe her now.

What is your pleasure Madam?


You know Hellen I am a mother to you.


Mine honorable Mistress.


Nay a mother, why not a mother? when I sed a mother
Me thought you saw a serpent, what is in mother,
That you start at it? I say I am your mother,
And put you in the Catalogue of those
That were enwombed mine, it is often seen
Adoption strives with nature, and choice breeds
A native slip to us from foreign seeds:
You nere oppressed me with a mothers groan,
Yet I express to you a mothers care,
(Gods mercy maiden) dos it curd thy blood
To say I am thy mother? what is the matter,
That this distempered messenger of wet?
The many colored Iris rounds thine eye?
-- Why, that you are my daughter?

That I am not.


I say I am your Mother.


Pardon Madam.
The Count Rosillion cannot be my brother:
I am from humble, he from honored name:
No note upon my Parents, his all noble,
My Master, my dear Lord he is, and I
His servant live, and will his vassal die:
He must not be my brother.

Nor I your Mother.


You are my mother Madam, would you were
So that my Lord your son were not my brother,
Indeed my mother, or were you both our mothers,
I care no more for, then I do for heaven,
So I were not his sister, cant no other,
But I your daughter, he must be my brother.

Yes Hellen, you might be my daughter in law,
God shield you mean it not, daughter and mother
So strive upon your pulse; what pale again?
My fear has caught your fondness! now I see
The mistrie of your loveliness, and find
Your salt tears head, now to all sense it is gross:
You love my son, invention is ashamed
Against the proclamation of thy passion
To say thou do not: therefore tell me true,
But tell me then it is so, for look, thy cheeks
Confess it 'ton tooth to the other, and thine eyes
See it so grosely shown in thy behauiours,
That in their kind they speak it, only sin
And hellish obstinacy tie thy tongue
That truth should be suspected, speak, is it so?
If it be so, you have wound a goodly clewe:
If it be not, forsweare't how ere I charge thee,
As heaven shall work in me for thine avail
To tell me truly.

Good Madam pardon me.


Do you love my Son?


Your pardon noble Mistress.


Love you my Son?


Do not you love him Madam?


Go not about; my love has in it a bond
Whereof the world takes note: Come, come, disclose:
The state of your affection, for your passions
Have to the full appeach'd.

Then I confess
Here on my knee, before high heaven and you,
That before you, and next unto high heaven, I love your Son:
My friends were poor but honest, so's my love:
Be not offended, for it hurts not him
That he is loved of me; I follow him not
By any token of presumptuous suite,
Nor would I have him, till I do deserve him,
Yet never know how that desert should be:
I know I love in vain, strive against hope:
Yet in this captious, and intemible Sieve.
I still pour in the waters of my love
And lack not to loose still; thus Indian like
Religious in mine error, I adore
The Sun that looks upon his worshipper,
But knows of him no more. My dearest Madam,
Let not your hate encounter with my love,
For loving where you do; but if your self,
Whose aged honor cites a virtuous youth,
Did ever, in so true a flame of liking,
Wish chastely, and love dearly, that your Dian
Was both her self and love, O then give pity
To her whose state is such, that cannot choose
But lend and give where she is sure to loose;
That seeks not to find that, her search implies,
But riddle like, lives sweetly where she dies.

Had you not lately an intent, speak truly,
To go to Paris?

Madam I had.


Wherefore? tell true.


I will tell truth* by grace it self I swear:
You know my Father left me some prescriptions
Of rare and proved effects, such as his reading
And manifest experience, had collected
For general sovereignty: and that he wil'd me
In heedefull'st reservation to bestow them,
As notes, whose faculties inclusiue were,
More then they were in note: Amongst the rest,
There is a remedy, approved, set down,
To cure the desperate languishings whereof
The King is rendered lost.

This was your motive for Paris, was it, speak?


My Lord, your son, made me to think of this;
Else Paris, and the medicine, and the King,
Had from the conversation of my thoughts,
Happily been absent then.

But think you Hellen,
If you should tender your supposed aid,
He would receive it? He and his Physicians
Are of a mind, he, that they cannot help him:
They, that they cannot help, how shall they credit
A poor unlearned Virgin, when the Schools
Embowel'd of their doctrine, have left off
The danger to it self.

There Is something in it
More then my Fathers skill, which was the great'st
Of his profession, that his good receipt,
Shall for my legacy be sanctified
By the luckiest stars in heaven, and would your honor
But give me leave to try success, I Would venture
The well lost life of mine, on his Graces cure,
By such a day, an hour.

Doo'st thou beleeue't?


I Madam knowingly.


Why Hellen thou shall have my leave and love,
Means and attendants, and my loving greetings
To those of mine in Court, I Will stay at home
And pray Gods blessing into thy attempt:
Begone to morrow, and be sure of this,
What I can help thee to, thou shall not miss.

Farewell young Lords, these warlike principles
Do not throw from you, and you my Lords farewell:
Share the advice betwixt you, if both gain, all
The gift does stretch it self as it is received,
And is enough for both.

It Is our hope sir,
After well entered soldiers, to return
And find your grace in health.

No, no, it cannot be; and yet my heart
Will not confess he owes the mallady
That does my life besiege: farewell young Lords,
Whether I live or die, be you the sons
Of worthy French men: let higher Italy
(Those bated that inherit but the fall
Of the last Monarchy) see that you come
Not to woo honor, but to wed it, when
The brauest questant shrinkes: find what you seek,
That fame may cry you loud: I say farewell.

Health at your bidding serve your Majesty.


Those girls of Italy, take heed of them,
They say our French, lack language to deny
If they demand: beware of being Captives
Before you serve.

Our hearts receive your warnings.


Farewell, come hither to me.


Oh my sweet Lord yt you will stay behind us.


It Is not his fault the spark.


Oh it is brave wars.


Most admirable, I have seen those wars.


I am commanded here, and kept a coil with,
Too young, and the next year, and it is too early.

And thy mind stand to it boy,
Steal away bravely.

I shall stay here the for-horse to a smock,
Creeking my shoes on the plain Masonry,
Till honor be bought up, and no sword worn
But one to dance with: by heaven, I Will steal away.

There Is honor in the theft.


Commit it Count.


I am your accessory, and so farewell.


I grow to you, and our parting is a tortured body.


Farewll Captain.


Sweet Mounsier Parolles.


Noble Heroes; my sword and yours are kin, good sparks and lustrous, a word
good metals. You shall find in the Regiment of the Spinij, one Captain
Spurio his sicatrice, with an Emblem of war here on his sinister cheek; it
was this very sword entrenched it: say to him I live, and observe his reports
for me


We shall noble Captain.


Mars doat on you for his nouices, what will ye do?


Stay the King.


Use a more spacious ceremony to the Noble Lords, you have restrained your
self within the List of too cold an adieu: be more expressiue to them; for
they wear themselves in the cap of the time, there do muster true gate; eat,
speak, and move under the influence of the most received star, and though
the devil lead the measure, such are to be followed: after them, and take a
more dilated farewell


And I will do so.


Worthy fellows, and like to prove most sinewie swordmen.


Pardon my Lord for me and for my tidings.


I Will see thee to stand up.


Then here is a man stands that has brought his pardon,
I would you had kneeled my Lord to ask me mercy,
And that at my bidding you could so stand up.

I would I had, so I had broke thy pate
And asked thee mercy for it.

Good faith a-crosse, but my good Lord it is thus,
Will you be cured of your infirmity?

No.


O will you eat no grapes my royal fox?
Yes but you will, my noble grapes, and if
My royal fox could reach them: I have seen a medicine
That Is able to breath life into a stone,
Quicken a rock, and make you dance Canari
With sprightly fire and motion, whose simple touch
Is powerful to arayse King Pippen, nay
To give great Charlemaine a pen in's hand
And write to her a loue-line.

What her is this?


Why doctor she: my Lord, there is one arrived,
If you will see her: now by my faith and honor,
If seriously I may convey my thoughts
In this my light deliverance, I have spoke
With one, that in her sex, her years, profession,
Wisdom and constancy, has amazed me more
Then I dare blame my weakness: will you see her?
For that is her demand, and know her business?
That done, laugh well at me.

Now good Lafew,
Bring in the admiration, that we with thee
May spend our wonder too, or take off thine
By wondering how thou tookst it.

Nay, I Will fit you,
And not be all day neither.

Thus he his special nothing ever prologues.


Nay, come your ways.


This haste has wings indeed.


Nay, come your ways,
This is his Majesty, say your mind to him,
A Traitor you do look like, but such traitors
His Majesty seldom fears, I am Cresseds Uncle,
That dare leave two together, far you well.

Now fair one, does your business follow us?


I my good Lord,
Gerard de Narbon was my father,
In what he did profess, well found.

I knew him.


The rather will I spare my praises toward him,
Knowing him is enough on's bed of death,
Many receipts he gave me, chiefly one,
Which as the dearest issue of his practice
And of his old experience, the only darling,
He bad me store up, as a triple eye,
Safer then mine own two: more dear I have so,
And hearing your high Majesty is touched
With that malignant cause, wherein the honor
Of my dear fathers gift, stands chief in power,
I come to tender it, and my appliance,
With all bound humbleness.

We thank you maiden,
But may not be so credulous of cure,
When our most learned Doctors leave us, and
The congregated College have concluded,
That laboring Art can never ransom nature
From her inaydible estate: I say we must not
So stain our judgment, or corrupt our hope,
To prostitute our past-cure malladie
To empericks, or to disseuer so
Our great self and our credit, to esteem
A senseless help, when help past sense we deem.

My duty then shall pay me for my pains:
I will no more enforce mine office on you,
Humbly entreating from your royal thoughts,
A modest one to bear me back again.

I cannot give thee less to be called grateful:
Thou thoughtst to help me, and such thanks I give,
As one near death to those that wish him live:
But what at full I know, thou know no part,
I knowing all my peril, thou no Art.

What I can do, can do no hurt to try,
Since you set up your rest against remedy:
He that of greatest works is finisher,
Often does them by the weakest minister:
So holy Writ, in babes has judgment shown,
When Judges have bin babes; great floods have flowne
From simple sources: and great Seas have dried
When Miracles have by the great'st been denied.
Often expectation fails, and most often there
Where most it promises: and often it hits,
Where hope is coldest, and despair most shifts.

I must not hear thee, fare thee well kind maid,
Thy pains not used, must by thy self be paid,
Proffers not took, reap thanks for their reward.

Inspired Merit so by breath is bard,
It is not so with him that all things knows
As it is with us, that square our guess by shows:
But most it is presumption in us, when
The help of heaven we count the act of men.
Dear sir, to my endeavors give consent,
Of heaven, not me, make an experiment.
I am not an Impostrue, that proclaim
My self against the leuill of mine aim,
But know I think, and think I know most sure,
My Art is not past power, nor you past cure.

Art thou so confident? Within what space
Hop'st thou my cure?

The greatest grace lending grace,
Ere twice the horses of the sun shall bring
Their fiery torcher his diurnall ring,
Ere twice in murke and occidentall dampe
Moist Hesperus, has quenched her sleepy Lamp:
Or four and twenty times the Pylots glass
Has told the theeuish minutes, how they pass:
What is infirm, from your sound parts shall fly,
Health shall live free, and sickness freely dye.

Upon thy certainty and confidence,
What dare thou venture?

Tax of impudence,
A strumpets boldness, a divulged shame
Traduced by odious ballads: my maidens name
Seard otherwise, ne worse of worst extended
With vildest torture, let my life be ended.

Methinks in thee some blessed spirit does speak
His powerful sound, within an organ weak:
And what impossibility would slay
In common sense, sense saues another way:
Thy life is dear, for all that life can rate
Worth name of life, in thee has estimate:
Youth, beauty, wisdom, courage, all
That happiness and prime, can happy call:
Thou this to hazard, needs must intimate
Skill infinite, or monstrous desperate,
Sweet practiser, thy Physic I will try,
That ministers thine own death if I die.

If I break time, or flinch in property
Of what I spoke, vnpittied let me die,
And well deserved: not helping, death's my see,
But if I help, what do you promise me.

Make thy demand.


But will you make it even?


I by my Scepter, and my hopes of help.


Then shall thou give me with thy kingly hand
What husband in thy power I will command:
Exempted be from me the arrogance
To choose from forth the royal blood of France,
My low and humble name to propagate
With any branch or image of thy state:
But such a one thy vassal, whom I know
Is free for me to ask, thee to bestow.

Here is my hand, the premises observed,
Thy will by my performance shall be served:
So make the choice of thy own time, for I
Thy resolved Patient, on thee still rely:
More should I question thee, and more I must,
Though more to know, could not be more to trust:
From whence thou can, how tended on, but rest
Vnquestion'd welcome, and undoubted blessed.
Give me some help here hoa, if thou proceed,
As high as word, my deed shall match thy deed.

Come on sir, I shall now put you to the height of your breeding.


I will show my self highly fed, and lowly taught, I know my business is but
to the Court


To the Court, why what place make you special, when you put off that with
such contempt, but to the Court


Truly Madam, if God have lent a man any manners, he may easily put it off at
Court: he that cannot make a leg, put off's cap, kiss his hand, and say
nothing, has neither leg, hands, lip, nor cap; and indeed such a fellow, to
say precisely, were not for the Court, But for me, I have an answer will serve
all men


Marry that is a bountiful answer that fits all questions.


It is like a Barbers chair that fits all buttockes, the pin buttocke, the
quatch-buttocke, the brawn buttocke, or any buttocke


Will your answer serve fit to all questions?


As fit as ten groats is for the hand of an Attorney, as your French Crown for
your taffety punke, as Tibs rush for Toms forefinger, as a pancake for
Shroue-tuesday, a Morris for May Day, as the nail to his hole, the Cuckold to
his horn, as a scolding queen to a wrangling knave, as the Nuns lip to the
Friars mouth, nay as the pudding to his skin


Have you, I say, an answer of such fitness for all questions?


From below your Duke, to beneath your Constable, it will fit any question.


It must be an answer of most monstrous size, that must fit all demands.


But a triflle neither in good faith, if the learned should speak truth of it:
here it is, and all that belongs to it. Ask me if I am a Courtier, it shall
do you no harm to learn


To be young again if we could: I will be a fool in question, hoping to be
the wiser by your answer


I pray you sir, are you a Courtier?


O Lord sir there is a simple putting off: more, more, a hundred of them.


Sir I am a poor friend of yours, that loves you.


O Lord sir, thick, thick, spare not me.


I think sir, you can eat none of this homely meat.


O Lord sir; nay put me to it, I warrant you.


You were lately whipped sir as I think.


O Lord sir, spare not me.


Do you cry O Lord sir at your whipping, and spare not me? Indeed your O Lord
sir, is very sequent to your whipping: you would answer very well to a
whipping if you were but bound to it


I nere had worse luck in my life in my O Lord sir: I see things may serve
long, but not serve ever


I play the noble huswife with the time, to entertain it so merrily with a
fool


O Lord sir, why there't serves well again.


And end sir to your business: give Hellen this,
And urge her to a present answer back,
Commend me to my kinsmen, and my son,
This is not much.

Not much commendation to them.


Not much imployement for you, you understand me.


Most fruitfully, I am there, before my legegs.


Have you again.


They say miracles are past, and we have our Philosophical persons, to make
modern and familiar things supernatural and causeless. Hence is it, that we
make trifles of terrors, ensconcing our selves into seeming knowledge, when we
should submit our selves to an unknown fear


Why it is the rarest argument of wonder, that has shot out in our latter times.


And so it is.


To be relinquisht of the Artists.


So I say both of Galen and Paracelsus.


Of all the learned and authenticke fellows.


Right so I say.


That gave him out incureable.


Why there it is, so say I too.


Not to be helped.


Right, as 'twere a man assured of a --


Uncertain life, and sure death.


Just, you say well: so would I have said.


I may truly say, it is a novelty to the world.


It is indeed if you will have it in showing, you shall read it in what do ye
call there


A showing of a heavenly effect in an earthly Actor.


That Is it, I would have said, the very same.


Why your Dolphin is not lustier: fore me
I speak in respect --

Nay it is strange, it is very strange, that is the brief and the tedious of
it, and he is of a most facinerious spirit, that will not acknowledge it to be
the --


Very hand of heaven.


I, so I say.


In a most weak --


And debile minister great power, grear trancendence, which should indeed give
us a further use to be made, then alone then recou'ry of the king, as to be


Generally thankful.


I would have said it, you say well: here comes the King.


Lustique, as the Dutchman says: I Will like a maid the Better whilst I have a
tooth in my head: why he is able to lead her a Carranto


Mor du vinager, is not this Helen?


Fore God I think so.


Go call before me all the Lords in Court,
Sit my preserver by thy patients side,
And with this healthful hand whose banished sense
Thou have repealed, a second time receive
The confirmation of my promised gift,
Which but attends thy naming.

Fair Maid send forth thine eye, this youthful parcel
Of Noble Batchellors, stand at my bestowing,
Ore whom both Sovereign power, and fathers voice
I have to use; thy frank election make,
Thou have power to choose, and they none to forsake.
To each of you, one fair and virtuous Mistress;
Fall when love please, marry to each but one.

I Would give bay curtall, and his furniture
My mouth no more were broken then these boys,
And writ as little beard.

Peruse them well:
Not one of those, but had a Noble father.

Gentlemen, heaven has through me, restored the king to health.


We understand it, and thank heaven for you.


I am a simple Maid, and therein wealthiest
That I protest, I simply am a Maid:
Please it your Majesty, I have done already:
The blushes in my cheeks thus whisper me,
We blush that thou should choose, but be refused;
Let the white death sit on thy cheek for ever,
We Will nere come there again.

Make choice and see,
Who shuns thy love, shuns all his love in me.

Now Dian from thy Altar do I fly,
And to imperial love, that God most high
Do my sighs stream: Sir, will you hear my suite?

And grant it.


Thanks sir, all the rest is mute.


I had rather be in this choice, then throw Ames-ace for my life.


The honor sir that flames in your fair eyes,
Before I speak too threatningly replies:
Love make your fortunes twenty times above
Her that so vvishes, and her humble love.

No better if you please.


My wish receive,
Which great love grant, and so I take my leave.

Do all they deny her? And they were sons of mine, I Would have them whipped, or I
would send them to 'th Turk to make Eunuchs of


Be not afraid that I your hand should take,
I Will never do you wrong for your own sake:
Blessing upon your vows, and in your bed
Find fairer fortune, if you ever wed.

These boys are boys of Ice, they will none have here: sure they are bastards
to the English, the French nere got em


You are too young, too happy, and too good
To make your self a son out of my blood.

Fair one, I think not so.


There Is one grape yet, I am sure thy father drunk wine. But if thou best not
an ass, I am a youth of fourteen: I have known thee already


I dare not say I take you, but I give
Me and my service, ever whilst I live
Into your guiding power: This is the man.

Why then young Bertram take her she is thy wife.


My wife my Liege? I shall beseech your highness
In such a business, give me leave to use
The help of mine own eyes.

Know thou not Bertram what she has done for me?


Yes my good Lord, but never hope to know why I should marry her.


Thou know she has raised me from my sickly bed.


But follows it my Lord, to bring me down
Must answer for your raising? I know her well:
She had her breeding at my fathers charge:
A poor Physicians daughter my wife? Disdain
Rather corrupt me ever.

It Is only title thou disdainst in her, the which
I can build up: strange is it that our bloods
Of color, weight, and heat, poured all together,
Would quite confound distinction: yet stands off
In differences so mighty. If she be
All that is virtuous (save what thou dislik'st)
A poor Physicians daughter, thou dislik'st
Of virtue for the name: but do not so:
From lowest place, whence virtuous things proceed,
The place is dignified by the doers deed.
Where great additions swell's, and virtue none,
It is a dropsied honor. Good a lone,
Is good without a name? Vileness is so:
The property by what is is, should go,
Not by the title. She is young, wise, fair,
In these, to Nature she is immediate heir:
And these breed honor: that is honors scorn,
Which challenges it self as honors borne,
And is not like the fire: Honors thrive,
When rather from our acts we them derive
Then our fore-goers: the mere words, a slave
Debosh'd on every tomb, on every grave:
A lying Trophee, and as often is dumb,
Where dust, and damned oblivion is the Tomb.
Of honored bones-indeed, what should be said?
If thou can like this creature, as a maid,
I can create the rest: Virtue, and she
Is her own dower: Honor and wealth, from me.

I cannot love her, nor will strive to do it.


Thou wrong'st thy self, if thou shold'st strive to choose.


That you are well restored my Lord, I Am glad:
Let the rest go.

My Honor's at the stake, which to defeat
I must produce my power. Here, take her hand,
Proud scornful boy, unworthy this good gift,
That do in vile misprision shackle up
My love, and her desert: that can not dream,
We poizing us in her defective scale,
Shall weigh thee to the beam: That wilt not know,
It is in Us to plant thine Honor, where
We please to have it grow. Cheek thy contempt:
Obey Our will, which travails in thy good:
Believe not thy disdain, but presently
Do thine own fortunes that obedient right
Which both thy duty owes, and Our power claims,
Or I will throw thee from my care for ever
Into the staggers, and the careless lapse
Of youth and ignorance: both my revenge and hate
Loosing upon thee, in the name of justice,
Without all terms of pity. Speak, thine answer.

Pardon my gracious Lord: for I submit
My fancy to your eyes, when I consider
What great creation, and what dole of honor
Flies where you bid it: I find that she which late
Was in my Nobler thoughts, most base: is now
The praised of the King, who so ennobled,
Is as 'twere borne so.

Take her by the hand,
And tell her she is thine: to whom I promise
A counterpoize: If not to thy estate,
A balance more repleat.

I take her hand.


Good fortune, and the favor of the King
Smile upon this Contract: whose Ceremony
Shall seem expedient on the now borne brief,
And be performed to night: the solemn Feast
Shall more attend upon the coming space,
Expecting absent friends. As thou love her,
Thy love's to me Religious: else, does err.

Do you hear Monsieur? A word with you.


Your pleasure sir.


Your Lord and Master did well to make his recantation.


Recantation? My Lord? my Master?


I: Is it not a Language I speak?


A most harsh one, and not to be understood without bloody succeeding My
Master


Are you Companion to the Count Rosillion?


To any Count, to all Counts: to what is man.


To what is Counts man: Counts master is of another style.


You are too old sir: Let it satisfy you, you are too old.


I must tell thee sirrah, I write Man: to which title age cannot bring thee.


What I dare too well do, I dare not do.


I did think thee for two ordinaries: to be a pretty wise fellow, thou did
make tolerable vent of thy travel, it might pass: yet the scarffes and the
bannerets about thee, did manifoldlie dissuade me from believing thee a vessel
of too great a burden. I have now found thee, when I loose thee again, I care
not: yet art thou good for nothing but taking up, and that the ourt scarce
worth


Had thou not the privilege of Antiquity upon thee.


Do not plundge thy self to far in anger, least thou hasten thy trial:
which if, Lord have mercy on thee for a hen, so my good window of Lettice fare
thee well, thy casement I need not open, for I look through thee. Give me thy
hand


My Lord, you give me most egregious indignity.


I with all my heart, and thou art worthy of it.


I have not my Lord deserved it.


Yes good faith, every dram of it, and I will not b^te thee a scruple.


Well, I shall be wiser.


Even as soon as thou can, for thou have to pull at a smacke a' th
contrary. If ever thou be bound in thy skarfe and beaten, thou shall find
what it is to be proud of thy bondage, I have a desire to hold my acquaintance
with thee, or rather my knowledge, that I may say in the default, he is a man I
know


My Lord you do me most insupportable vexation.


I would it were hell pains for thy sake, and my poor doing eternal: for
doing I am past, as I will by thee, in what motion age will give me leave


Well, thou have a son shall take this disgrace off me; scuruy, old, filthy,
scuruy Lord: Well, I must be patient, there is no fettering of authority. I Will
beat him (by my life) if I can meet him with any conuenience, and he were
double and double a Lord. I Will have no more pity of his age then I would have
of -- I Will beat him, and if I could but meet him again


Sir, your Lord and masters married, there is news for you: you have a new
Mistress


I most unfeignedly beseech your Lordshippe to make some reservation of your
wrongs. He is my good Lord, whom I serve above is my master


Who? God.


I sir.


The devil it is, that is thy master. Why dooest thou garter up thy arms a
this fashion? Do make hose of thy sleeves? Do other servants so? Thou were
best set thy lower part where thy nose stands. By mine Honor, If I were but two
hours younger, I Would beat thee: meethink'st thou art a general offense, and
every man should beat thee: I think thou wast created for men to breath
themselves upon thee


This is hard and undeserved measure my Lord.


Go too sir, you were beaten in Italy for picking a kernel out of a Pomgranat,
you are a vagabond, and no true traveler: you are more saucy with Lords and
honorable personages, then the Commission of your birth and virtue gives you
Heraldry. You are not worth another word, else I Would call you knave. I leave you


Good, very good, it is so then: good, very good, let it be concealed awhile.


Undone, and forfeited to cares for ever.


What Is the matter sweetheart?


Although before the solemn Priest I have sworn, I will not bed her.


What? what sweet heart?


O my Parrolles, they have married me:
I Will to the Tuscan wars, and never bed her.

France is a dog-hole, and it no more merits,
The tread of a man's foot: too 'th wars.

There Is letters from my mother: What the import is, I know not yet.


I that would be known: too 'th wars my boy, too 'th wars:
He wears his honor in a box unseen,
That hugges his kickie wickie hear at home,
Spending his manly marrow in her arms
Which should sustain the bound and high curuet
Of Marses fiery steed: to other Regions,
France is a stable, we that dwell in it Iades,
Therefore too 'th war.

It shall be so, I Will send her to my house,
Acquaint my mother with my hate to her,
And wherefore I am fled: Write to the King
That which I durst not speak. His present gift
Shall furnish me to those Italian fields
Where noble fellows strike: Wars is no strife
To the dark house, and the detected wife.

Will this Caprichio hold in thee, art sure?


Go with me to my chamber, and advice me.
I Will send her straight away: To morrow,
I Will to the wars, she to her single sorrow.

Why these bals bound, there is noise in it. It Is hard
A young man married, is a man that is mard:
Therefore away, and leave her bravely: go,
The King has done you wrong: but hush it is so.

My mother greets me kindly, is she well?


She is not well, but yet she has her health, she is very merry, but yet she is
not well: but thanks be given she is very well, and wants nothing in th world:
but yet she is not well


If she be very well, what does she ayle, that she is not very well?


Truly she is very well indeed, but for two things


What two things?


One, that she is not in heaven, whether God send her quickly: the other, that
she is in earth, from whence God send her quickly


Bless you my fortunate Lady.


I hope sir I have your good will to have mine own good fortune.


You had my prayers to lead them on, and to keep them on, have them still. O
my knave, how does my old Lady


So that you had her wrinkles, and I her money,
I would she did as you say.

Why I say nothing.


Marry you are the wiser man: for many a man's tongue shakes out his masters
undoing: to say nothing, to do nothing, to know nothing, and to have nothing,
is to be a great part of your title, which is within a very little of nothing


Away, the art a knave.


You should have said sir before a knave, the art a knave, that is before me the
art a knave: this had been truth sir


Go too, thou art a witty fool, I have found thee.


Did you find me in your self sir, or were you taught to find me?


The search sir was profitable, and much Fool may you find in you, even to the
worlds pleasure, and the increase of laughter


A good knave in faith, and well fed.
Madam, my Lord will go away to night,
A very serrious business call's on him:
The great prerogative and rite of love,
Which as your due time claims, he does acknowledge,
But puts it off to a compelled restraint:
Whose want, and whose delay* is strewn with sweets
Which they distill now in the curbed time,
To make the coming hour oreflow with joy,
And pleasure drown the brim.

What Is his will else?


That you will take your instant leave a' th king,
And make this have as your own good proceeding,
Strengthened with what Apology you think
May make it probable need.

What more commands he?


That having this obtained, you presently
Attend his further pleasure.

In every thing I wait upon his will.


I shall report it so,


I pray you come sirrah.


But I hope your Lordshippe thinks not him a soldier.


Yes my Lord and of very valiant approofe.


You have it from his own deliverance.


And by other warranted testimony.


Then my Dial goes not true, I took this Lark for a bunting.


I do assure you my Lord he is very great in knowledge, and accordingly
valiant


I have then sinned against his experience, and transgrest against his valor,
and my state that way is dangerous, since I cannot yet find in my heart to
repent: Here he comes, I pray you make us friends, I will pursue the amity


These things shall be done sir.


Pray you sir whose his Tailor?


Sir?


O I know him well, I sir, he sirs a good workman, a very good Tailor.


Is she gone to the king?


She is.


Will she away to night?


As you will have her.


I have writ my letters, casketted my treasure,
Given order for our horses, and to night,
When I should take possession of the Bride,
And ere I do begin.

A good Trauailer is something at the latter end of a dinner, but on that lies
three thirds, and uses a known truth to pass a thousand nothings with, should
be once hard, and thrice beaten. God save you Captain


Is there any unkindness between my Lord and you Monsieur?


I know not how I have deserved to run into my Lords displeasure.


You have made shift to run into it, boots and spurs and all: like him that
leapt into the Custard, and out of it you will run again, rather then suffer
question for your residence


It may be you have mistaken him my Lord.


And shall do so ever, though I took him at's prayers. Fare you well my Lord,
and believe this of me, there can be no kernel in this light Nut: the soul of
this man is his clothes: Trust him not in matter of heavy consequence: I have
kept of them tame, and know their natures. Farewell Monsieur, I have spoken
better of you, then you have or will to deserve at my hand, but we must do good
against evil


An idle Lord, I swear.


I think so.


Why do you not know him?


Yes, I do know him well, and common speech
Gives him a worthy pass. Here comes my clog.

I have sir as I was commanded from you
Spoke with the King, and have procured his leave
For present parting, only he desires
Some private speech with you.

I shall obey his will.
You must not marvel Helen at my course,
Which holds not color with the time, nor does
The ministration, and required office
On my particular. Prepared I was not
For such a business, therefore am I found
So much unsettled: This drives me to entreat you,
That presently you take your way for home,
And rather muse then ask why I entreat you,
For my respects are better then they seem,
And my appointments have in them a need
Greater then shows it self at the first view,
To you that know them not. This to my mother,
'Twill be two days ere I shall see you, so
I leave you to your wisdom.

Sir, I can nothing say,
But that I am your most obedient servant.

Come, come, no more of that.


And ever shall
With true observance seek to eeke out that
Wherein toward me my homely stars have faild
To equal my great fortune.

Let that go: my have is very great. Farewell:
Hie home.

Pray sir your pardon.


Well, what would you say?


I am not worthy of the wealth I owe,
Nor dare I say it is mine: and yet it is,
But like a timorous thief, most feign would steal
What law does vouch mine own.

What would you have?


Something, and scarce so much: nothing indeed,
I would not tell you what I would my Lord: Faith yes,
Strangers and foes do sunder, and not kiss.

I pray you stay not, but in have to horse.


I shall not break your bidding, good my Lord:
Where are my other men? Monsieur, farewell.

Go thou toward home, where I will never come,
Whilst I can shake my sword, or hear the drum:
Away, and for our flight.

Bravely, Coragio.


So that from point to point, now have you heard
The fundamental reasons of this war,
Whose great decision has much blood let forth
And more thirsts after.

Holy seems the quarrel
Upon your Graces part: black and fearful
On the opposer.

Therefore we marvel much our Cousin France
Would in so just a business, shut his bosom
Against our borrowing prayers.

Good my Lord,
The reasons of our stare I cannot yield,
But like a common and an outward man,
That the great figure of a Counsel frames,
By self unable motion, therefore dare not
Say what I think of it, since I have found
My self in my incertaine grounds to fail
As often as I guest.

Be it his pleasure.


But I am sure the younger of our nature,
That surfeit on their ease, will day by day
Come here for Physic.

Welcome shall they be:
And all the honors that can fly from us,
Shall on them settle: you know your places well,
When better fall, for your auailes they fell,
To morrow to 'th the field.

It has happened all, as I would have had it, save that he comes not along
with her


By my troth I take my young Lord to be a very melancholy man.


By what observance I pray you.


Why he will look upon his boot, and sing: mend the Ruff and sing, ask
questions and sing, pick his teeth, and sing: I know a man that had this
trick of melancholy hold a goodly Manor for a song


Let me see what he writes, and when he means to come.


I have no mind to Isbell since I was at Court. Our old Lings, and our Isbels
a' th Country, are nothing like your old Ling and your Isbels a' th Court: the
brains of my Cupid's knocked out, and I begin to love, as an old man loves
money, with no stomach


What have we here?


In that you have there.
I have sent you a daughter-in-Law, she has recovered the King, and undone
me: I have wedded her, not bedded her, and sworn to make the not eternal. You
shall hear I am run away, know it before the report come. If there be
breadth enough in the world, I will hold a long distance. My duty to you.

Your unfortunate son, Bertram.



This is not well rash and unbridled boy,
To fly the favors of so good a King,
To pluck his indignation on thy head,
By the misprising of a Maid too virtuous
For the contempt of Empire.

O Madam, yonder is heavy news within between two soldiers, and my young
Lady


What is the matter.


Nay there is some comfort in the news, some comfort, your son will not be
killed so soon as I thought he would


Why should he be killed?


So say I Madame, if he run away, as I hear he does, the danger is in
standing to it, that is the loss of men, though it be the getting of children.
Here they come will tell you more. For my part I only hear your son was
run away


Save you good Madam.


Madam, my Lord is gone, for ever gone.


Do not say so.


Think upon patience, pray you Gentlemen,
I have felt so many quirkes of joy and grief,
That the first face of neither on the start
Can woman me vntoo't. Where is my son I pray you?

Madam he is gone to serve the Duke of Florence,
We met him thitherward, for thence we came:
And after some dispatch in hand at Court,
Thither we bend again.

Look on his Letter Madam, here is my Pasport.
When thou can get the Ring upon my finger, which never shall come off, and
show me a child begotten of thy body, that I am father too, then call me
husband: but in such a (then) I write a Never. This is a dreadful sentence

Brought you this Letter Gentlemen?


I Madam, and for the Contents sake are sorry for our pains.


I prithee Lady have a better cheer,
If thou engrossest, all the greefes are thine,
Thou robst me of a moity: He was my son,
But I do wash his name out of my blood,
And thou art all my child. Toward Florence is he?

I Madam.


And to be a soldier.


Such is his noble purpose, and beleeu't
The Duke will lay upon him all the honor
That good conuenience claims.

Return you thither.


I Madam, with the swiftest wing of speed.


Till I have no wife, I have nothing in France,
It Is bitter.

Find you that there?


I Madame.


It Is but the boldness of his hand happily, which his heart was not consenting
too


Nothing in France, until he have no wife:
There Is nothing here that is too good for him
But only she, and she deserves a Lord
That twenty such rude boys might tend upon,
And call her hourly Mistress. Who was with him?

A servant only, and a Gentleman: whlch I have sometime known.


Parolles was it not?


I my good Lady, he.


A very tainted fellow, and full of wickedness,
My son corrupts a well derived nature
With his inducement.

Indeed good Lady the fellow has a deal of that, too much, which holds him
much to have


Y' are welcome Gentlemen, I will entreat you when you see my son, to tell
him that his sword can never win the honor that he looses: more I Will entreat
you written to bear along


We serve you Madam in that and all your worthiest affairs.


Not so, but as we change our courtesies,
Will you draw near?

Till I have no wife I have nothing in France.
Nothing in France until he has no wife:
Thou shall have none Rossillion, none in France,
Then have thou all again: poor Lord, is it I
That chase thee from thy Country, and expose
Those tender limbs of thine, to the event
Of the none-sparing war? And is it I,
That drive thee from the sportiue Court, where thou
Was It shot at with fair eyes, to be the mark
Of smoakie Musk^ts? O you leaden messengers,
That ride upon the violent speed of fire,
Fly with false aim, move the still-peering air
That sings with piercing, do not touch my Lord:
Who ever shoots at him, I set him there.
Who ever charges on his forward breast
I am the Caitiffe that do hold him to it,
And though I kill him not, I am the cause
His death was so effected: Better 'twere
I met the rauine Lion when he roared
With sharp constraint of hunger: better 'twere,
That all the miseries which nature owes
Were mine at once. No come thou home Rossillion,
Whence honor but of danger winnes a scarre,
As often it looses all. I will be gone:
My being here it is, that holds thee hence,
Shall I stay here to do it? No, no, although
The air of Paradise did fan the house,
And Angles offic'd all: I will be gone,
That pitiful rumor may report my flight
To consolate thine ear. Come night, end day,
For with the dark (poor thief) I Will steal away.

The General of our horse thou art, and we
Great in our hope, lay our best love and credence
Upon thy promising fortune*

Sir it is
A charge too heavy for my strength, but yet
We Will strive to bear it for your worthy sake,
To the extreme edge of hazard.

Then go thou for^h,
And fortune play upon thy prosperous helm
As thy auspicious mistress.

This very day
Great Mars I put my self into thy file,
Make me but like my thoughts, and I shall prove
A lover of thy drum, hater of love.

Alas! and would you take the letter of her:
Might you not know she would do, as she has done,
By sending me a Letter. Read it again.
I am S. Jacques Pilgrim, thither gone:
Ambitious love has so in me offended,
That barefoot plod I the cold ground upon
With sainted vow my faults to have amended.
Write, write, that from the bloody course of war,
My dearest Master your dear son, may hie,
Bless him at home in peace. Whilst I from far,
His name with zealous fervor sanctify:
His taken labors bid him me forgive:
I his despightfull Juno sent him forth,
From Courtly friends, with Camping foes to live,
Where death and danger dogs the heels of worth.
He is too good and fair for death, and me,
Whom I my self embrace, to set him free.

Ah what sharp stings are in her mildest words?
Rynaldo, you did never lack advice so much,
As letting her pass so: had I spoke with her,
I could have well diuerted her intents,
Which thus she has prevented.

Pardon me Madam,
If I had given you this at ouer-night,
She might have been ore-tane: and yet she writes
Pursuit would be but vain.

What Angel shall
Bless this unworthy husband, he cannot thrive,
Unless her prayers, whom heaven delights to bear
And loves to grant, repreeue him from the wrath
Of greatest Justice. Write, write Rynaldo,
To this unworthy husband of his wife,
Let every word weigh heavy of her worth,
That he does weigh too light: my greatest grief,
Though little he do feel it, set down sharply.
Dispatch the most convenient messenger,
When happily he shall hear that she is gone,
He will return, and hope I may that she
Hearing so much, will speed her foot again,
Led hither by pure love: which of them both
Is dearest to me, I have no skill in sense
To make distinction: provide this Messenger:
My heart is heavy, and mine age is weak,
Grief would have tears, and sorrow bids me speak.

Nay come,
For if they do approach the City,
We shall loose all the sight.

They say, the French Count has done
Most honorable service.

It is reported,
That he has taken their great'st Commander,
And that with his own hand he slew
The Dukes brother: we have lost our labor,
They are gone a contrary way^ hark,
you may know by their Trumpets.

Come lets return again,
And suffice our selves with the report of it.
Well Diana, take heed of this French Earl,
The honor of a Maid is her name,
And no Legacy is so rich
As honesty.

I have told my neighbor
How you have been solicited by a Gentleman
His Companion.

I know that knave, hang him, one Parolles, a filthy Officer he is in those
suggestions for the young Earl, beware of them Diana; their promises,
entisements, oaths, tokens, and all these engines of lust, are not the things
they go under: many a maid has been seduced by them, and the misery is
example, that so terrible shows in the wrack of maiden-hood, cannot for all
that dissuade succession, but that they are limed with the twigges that
threatens them. I hope I need not to advise you further, but I hope your own
grace will keep you where you are, though there were no further danger known,
but the modesty which is so lost


You shall not need to fear me.


I hope so: look here comes a pilgrim, I know she will lie at my house,
thither they send one another, I Will question her. God save you pilgrim, whether
are bound


To S. Jacques la grand.
Where do the Palmers lodge, I do beseech you?

At the S. Francis here beside the Port.


Is this the way?


I marry is it. Hark you, they come this way:
If you will tarry holy Pilgrim
But till the troops come by,
I will conduct you where you shall be lodged,
The rather for I think I know your hostess
As ample as my self.

Is it your self?


If you shall please so Pilgrim.


I thank you, and will stay upon your leisure.


you came I think from France?


I did so.


Here you shall see a Countriman of yours
That has done worthy service.

His name I pray you?


The Count Rossillion: know you such a one?


But by the ear that hears most nobly of him:
His face I know not.

What somere he is
He Is bravely taken here. He stole from France
As it is reported: for the King had married him
Against his liking. Think you it is so?

I surely mere the truth, I know his Lady.


There is a Gentleman that serves the Count,
Reports but coursely of her.

What Is his name?


Monsieur Parrolles.


Oh I believe with him,
In argument of praise, or to the worth
Of the great Count himself, she is too mean
To have her name repeated, all her deserving
Is a reserved honesty, and that
I have not heard examined.

Alas poor Lady,
It Is a hard bondage to become the wife
Of a detesting Lord.

I write good creature, wheresoere she is,
Her heart waighes sadly: this young maid might do her
A shrewd turn if she pleased.

How do you mean?
May be the amorous Count solicites her
In the unlawful purpose.

He does indeed,
And brokes with all that can in such a suite
Corrupt the tender honor of a Maid:
But she is armed for him, and keeps her guard
In honestest defense.

The gods forbid else.


So, now they come:
That is Anthonio the Dukes eldest son,
That Escalus.

Which is the Frenchman?


He,
That with the plume, it is a most gallant fellow,
I would he loved his wife: if he were honester
He were much goodlier. Is It not a handsome Gentleman

I like him well.


It Is pity he is not honest: yonds that same knave
That leads him to these places: were I his Lady,
I would poison that vile Rascal.

Which is he?


That Jack an-apes with scarfes. Why is he melancholy?


Perchance he^s hurt in th battle.


Loose our drum? Well.


He Is shrewdly vexed at something. Look he has spyed us.


Marry hang you.


And your courtesy, for a ring-carrier.


The troop is past: Come pilgrim, I will bring you, Where you shall host: Of
inioyn'd penitent
There Is four or five, to great S. Jacques bound,
Already at my house.

I humbly thank you:
Please it this Matron, and this gentle Maid
To eat with us to night, the charge and thanking
Shall be for me* and to requite you further,
I will bestow some precepts of this Virgin,
Worthy the note.

We Will take your offer kindly.


Nay good my Lord put him to it: let him have his way.


If your Lordshippe find him not a Hilding, hold me no more in your respect.


On my life my Lord* a bubble.


Do you think I am so far
Deceived in him.

Believe it my Lord, in mine own direct knowledge, without any malice, but to
speak of him as my kinsman, he is a most notable Coward, an infinite and
endless Liar, an hourly promise-breaker, the owner of no one good quality,
worthy your Lordships entertainment


It were fit you knew him, least* reposing too far in his virtue which he
has not, he might at some great and trusty business, in a maine danger,
fail you


I would I knew in what particular action to try him.


None better then to let him fetch off his drum, which you hear him so
confidently undertake to do


I with a troop of Florentines will suddenly surprise him; such I will have whom
I am sure he knows not from the enemy: we will bind and hoodwinke him so,
that he shall suppose no other but that he is carried into the Leager of the
adversaries, when we bring him to our own tents: be but your Lordship present
at his examination, if he do not for the promise of his life, and in the
highest compulsion of base fear, offer to betray you, and deliver all the
intelligence in his power against you, and that with the divine forfeite of his
soul upon oath, never trust my judgment in any thing


O for the love of laughter, let him fetch his drum, he says he has a
stratagem for it: when your Lordship sees the bottom of this success in it, and
to what mettle this counterfeyt lump of ours will be melted if you give him not
John drums entertainment, your inclining cannot be removed. Here he comes


O for the love of laughter hinder not the honor of his design, let him fetch
off his drum in any hand


How now Monsieur? This drum sticks sorely in your disposition.


A pox on it, let it go, it is but a drum.


But a drum: Is It but a drum? A drum so lost. There was excellent command,
to charge in with our horse upon our own wings, and to rend our own soldiers


That was not to be blamed in the command of the service: it was a disaster of
war that Caesar him self could not have prevented, if he had been there to
command


Well, we cannot greatly condemn our success: some dishonor we had in the
loss of that drum, but it is not to be recovered


It might have been recovered.


It might, but it is not now.


It is to be recovered, but that the merit of service is sildome attributed to
the true and exact performer, I would have that drum or another, or hic iacet


Why if you have a stomach, to it Monsieur: if you think your mystery in
stratagem, can bring this instrument of honor again into his native quarter,
be magnanimious in the enterprise and go on, I will grace the attempt for a
worthy exploit: if you speed well in it, the Duke shall both speak of it, and
extend to you what further becomes his greatness, even to the utmost syllable
of your worthiness


By the hand of a soldier I will undertake it.


But you must not now slumber in it.


I Will about it this evening, and I will presently pen down my dilemma's,
encourage my self in my certainty, put my self into my mortal preparation:
and by midnight look to hear further from me


May I be bold to acquaint his grace you are gone about it.


I know not what the success will be my Lord, but the attempt I vow.


I know the art valiant,
And to the possibility of thy souldiership,
Will subscribe for thee: Farewell.

I love not many words.


No more then a fish loves water. Is not this a strange fellow my Lord, that so
confidently seems to undertake this business, which he knows is not to be
done, damnes himself to do, and dares better be damnd then to do it


You do not know him my Lord as we do, certain it is that he will steal
himself into a man's favor, and for a week escape a great deal of
discoueries, but when you find him out, you have him ever after


Why do you think he will make no deed at all of this that so seriously he
dooes address himself unto


None in the world, but return with an invention, and clap upon you two or
three probable lies: but we have almost imbost him, you shall see his fall to
night; for indeed he is not for your Lordshippes respect


We Will make you some sport with the Fox ere we case him. He was first smoked
by the old Lord Lafew, when his disguise and he is parted, tell me what a sprat
you shall find him, which you shall see this very night


I must go look my twigges,
He shall be caught.

Your brother he shall go along with me.


As't please your Lordship, I Will leave you.


Now will I lead you to the house, and show you
The Less I spoke of.

But you say she is honest.


That Is all the fault: I spoke with her but once,
And found her wondrous cold, but I sent to her
By this same Coxcombe that we have in th wind
Tokens and Letters, which she did resend,
And this is all I have done: She Is a fair creature,
Will you go see her?

With all my heart my Lord.


If you misdoubt me that I am not she,
I know not how I shall assure you further,
But I shall loose the grounds I work upon.

Though my estate be fallen, I was well borne,
Nothing acquainted with these businesses,
And would not put my reputation now
In any staining act.

Nor would I wish you.
First give me trust, the Count he is my husband,
And what to your sworn counsel I have spoken,
Is so from word to word: and then you cannot
By the good aid that I of you shall borrow,
Err in bestowing it.

I should believe you,
For you have showed me that which well approues
Y' are great in fortune.

Take this purse of Gold,
And let me buy your friendly help thus far,
Which I will ouer-pay, and pay again
When I have found it. The Count he woes your daughter,
Lays down his wanton siedge before her beauty,
Resolve to carry her: let her in fine consent
As we will direct her how it is best to bear it:
Now his important blood will naught deny,
That she will demand: a ring the County wears,
That downward has succeeded in his house
From son to son, some four or five discents,
Since the first father wore it. This Ring he holds
In most rich choice: yet in his idle fire,
To buy his will, it would not seem too dear,
How ere repented after.

Now I see the bottom of your purpose.


You see it lawful then, it is no more,
But that your daughter ere she seems as won,
Desires this Ring; appoints him an encounter;
In fine, delivers me to fill the time,
Her self most chastely absent: after
To marry her, I Will add three thousand Crowns
To what is past already.

I have yielded:
Instruct my daughter how she shall persevere,
That time and place with this deceit so lawful
May prove coherent. Every night he comes
With Musickes of all sorts, and songs composed
To her unworthiness: It nothing steeds us
To chide him from our eeues, for he persists
As if his life lay on it.

Why then to night
Let us assay our plot, which if it speed,
Is wicked meaning in a lawful deed;
And lawful meaning in a lawful act,
Where both not sin, and yet a sinful fact.
But let us about it.

He can come no other way but by this hedge corner: when you sallie upon him,
speak what terrible Language you will: though you understand it not your
selves, no matter: for we must not seem to understand him, unless some one
among us, whom we must produce for an Interpreter


Good Captain, let me be the Interpreter.


Art not acquainted with him? knows he not thy voice?


No sir I warrant you.


But what linsie wolsy have thou to speak to us again.


E'n such as you speak to me.


He must think us some band of strangers, in th adversaries entertainment. Now
he has a smacke of all neighboring Languages: therefore we must every one be
a man of his own fancy, not to know what we speak one to another: so we seem
to know, is to know straight our purpose: Choughs language, gabble enough, and
good enough. As for you interpreter, you must seem very politic. But couch
hoa, here he comes, to beguile two hours in a sleep, and then to return
and swear the lies he forges


Ten a clock: Within these three hours 'twill be time enough to go home.
What shall I say I have done? It must be a very plausiue invention that
carries it. They begin to smoke me, and disgraces have of late, knocked too
often at my door: I find my tongue is too foole-hardie, but my heart has the
fear of Ma^s before it, and of his creatures, not daring the reports of my
tongue


This is the first truth that ere thine own tongue was guilty of.


What the devil should move me to undertake the recovery of this drum,
being not ignorant of the impossibility, and knowing I had no such purpose? I
must give my self some hurts, and say I got them in exploit: yet slight ones
will not carry it. They will say, came you off with so little? And great ones
I dare not give, wherefore what is the instance. Tongue, I must put you into a
Butter-womans mouth, and buy my self another of Baiazeths Mule, if you prattle
me into these perilles


Is it possible he should know what he is, and be that he is.


I would the cutting of my garments would serve the turn, or the breaking of my
Spanish sword


We cannot afford you so.


Or the baring of my beard, and to say it was in stratagem.


'Twould not do.


Or to drown my clothes, and say I was stripped.


Hardly serve.


Though I swore I leapt from the window of the Citadell.


How deep?


Thirty fadome.


Three great oaths would scarce make that be believed.


I would I had any drum of the enemies, I would swear I recouer'd it.


You shall hear one anon.


A drum now of the enemies.


Throca movousus, cargo, cargo, cargo.


Cargo, cargo, cargo, villianda par corbo, cargo.


O ransom, ransom,
Do not hide mine eyes.

Boskos thromuldo boskos.


I know you are the Mu^kos Regiment,
And I shall loose my life for want of language.
If there be here German or Dane, Low Dutch,
Italian, or French, let him speak to me,
I Will discover that, which shall undo the Florentine.

Boskos vauvado, I understand thee, and can speak thy tongue: Kerelybonto sir,
betake thee to thy faith, for seventeen ponyards are at thy bosom


Oh.


Oh pray, pray, pray,
Manka re^ania dulche.

Oscorbidulchos voliuorc^.


The General is content to spare thee yet,
And hoodwinkt as thou art, will lead thee on
To gather from thee. Happily thou may inform
Something to save thy life.

O let me live,
And all the secrets of our camp I Will show,
Their force, their purposes: Nay, I Will speak that,
Which you will wonder at.

But will thou faithfully?


If I do not, damn me.


Acordo linta.
Come on, thou are granted space.

Go tell the Count Rossillion and my brother,
We have caught the woodcocke, and will keep him mufled
Till we do hear from them.

Captain I will.


A will betray us all unto our selves,
Inform on that.

So I will sir.


Till then I Will keep him dark and safely locked.


They told me that your name was Fontybell.


No my good Lord, Diana.


Titled Goddess,
And worth it with addition: but fair soul,
In your fine frame has love no quality?
If the quick fire of youth light not your mind,
You are no Maiden but a monument
When you are dead you should be such a one
As you are now: for you are cold and stern,
And now you should be as your mother was
When your sweet self* was got.

She then was honest.


So should you be.


No:
My mother did but duty, such (my Lord)
As you owe to your wife.

No more a' that:
I prithee do not strive against my vows:
I was compelled to her, but I love thee
By loves own sweet constraint, and will for ever
Do thee all rights of service.

I so you serve us
Till we serve you: But when you have our Roses,
You barely leave our thorns to prick our selves,
And mock us with our bareness.

How have I sworn.


It Is not the many oaths that makes the truth,
But the plain single vow, that is vowed true:
What is not holy, that we swear not by,
But take the highest to witness: then pray you tell me.
If I should swear by Jove's great attributes,
I loved you dearly, would you believe my oaths,
When I did love you ill? This has no holding
To swear by him whom I protest to love
That I will work against him. Therefore your oaths
Are words and poor conditions, but vnseal'd
At lest in my opinion.

Change it, change it:
Be not so holy cruel: Love is holy,
And my integrity never knew the crafts
That you do charge men with: Stand no more off,
But give thy self unto my sick desires,
Who then recouers. Say thou art mine, and ever
My love as it begins, shall so persevere.

I see that men make rope's in such a scarre,
That we will forsake our selves. Give me that Ring.

I Will lend it thee my dear; but have no power
To give it from me.

Will you not my Lord?


It is an honor longing to our house,
Bequeathed down from many Ancestors,
Which were the greatest obloquie in th world,
In me to loose.

Mine Honors such a Ring,
My chastities the Jewel of our house,
Bequeathed down from many Ancestors,
Which were the greatest obloquie in th world,
In me to loose. Thus your own proper wisdom
Brings in the Champion honor on my part,
Against your vain assault.

Here, take my Ring,
My house, mine honor, yea my life be thine,
And I Will be bid by thee.

When midnight comes, knock at my chamber window:
I Will order take, my mother shall not hear.
Now will I charge you in the band of truth,
When you have conquered my yet maiden-bed,
Remain there but an hour, nor speak to me:
My reasons are most strong, and you shall know them,
When back again this Ring shall be delivered:
And on your finger in the night, I Will put
Another Ring, that what in time proceeds,
May token to the future, our past deeds.
Adieu till then, then fail not: you have won
A wife of me, though there my hope be done.

A heaven on earth I have won by wooing thee.


For which, live long to thank both heaven and me,
You may so in the end.
My mother told me just how he would woo,
As if she sat in's heart. She says, all men
Have the like oaths: He had sworn to marry me
When his wife's dead: therefore I Will lie with him
When I am buried. Since Frenchmen are so braide,
Marry that will, I live and die a Maid:
Only in this disguise, I think it no sin,
To cosen him that would unjustly win.

You have not given him his mothers letter.


I have deliu'red it an hour since, there is some thing in it that stings his
nature: for on the reading it, he changed almost into another man


He has much worthy blame laid upon him, for shaking off so good a wife, and so
sweet a Lady


Especially, he has incurred the everlasting displeasure of the King, who had
even tuned his bounty to sing happiness to him. I will tell you a thing, but
you shall let it dwell darkly with you


When you have spoken it it is dead, and I am the grave of it.


He has perverted a young Gentlewoman here in Florence, of a most chaste
renown, and this night he fleshes his will in the spoil of her honor: he
has given her his monumentall Ring, and thinks himself made in the unchaste
composition


Now God delay our rebellion as we are our selves, what things are we.


Merely our own traitors. And as in the common course of all treasons, we
still see them reveal themselves, till they attain to their abhorred ends: so
he that in this action contriues against his own Nobility in his proper
stream, ore-flowes himself


Is it not meant damnable in us, to be Trumpeters of our unlawful intents? We
shall not then have his company to night


Not till after midnight: for he is dieted to his hour.


That approaches apace: I would gladly have him see his company anathomiz'd,
that he might take a measure of his own judgments, wherein so curiously he
had set this counterfeit


We will not meddle with him till he come; for his presence must be the whip of
the other


In the mean time, what hear you of these Wars?


I hear there is an ouerture of peace.


Nay, I assure you a peace concluded.


What will Count Rossillion do then? Will he travail higher, or return again
into France


I perceive by this demand, you are not altogether of his council.


Let it be forbid sir, so should I be a great deal of his act.


Sir, his wife some two months since fled from his house, her pretense is a
pilgrimage to Saint Jacques le grand; which holy undertaking, with most austere
sanctimonie she accomplished: and there residing, the tenderness of her Nature,
became as a prey to her grief: in fine, made a groan of her last breath, and
now she sings in heaven


How is this justified?


The stronger part of it by her own Letters, which makes her story true, even
to the point of her death: her death it self, which could not be her office to
say, is come: was faithfully confirmed by the Rector of the place


Has the Count all this intelligence?


I, and the particular confirmations, point from point, to the full arming of
the verity


I am heartily sorry that he will be glad of this.


How mightily sometimes, we make us comforts of our losses.


And how mightily some other times, we drown our gain in tears, the great
dignity that his valor has here acquired for him, shall at home be
encountered with a shame as ample


The web of our life, is of a mingled yarne, good and ill together: our
virtues would be proud, if our faults whipped them not, and our crimes would
despair if they were not cherished by our virtues

How now? Where Is your master?


He met the Duke in the street sir, of whom he has taken a solemn leave: his
Lordshippe will next morning for France. The Duke has offered him Letters of
commendations to the King


They shall be no more then needful there, if they were more then they can
commend


They cannot be too sweet for the Kings tartness, here is his Lordship now.
How now my Lord, is it not after midnight


I have to night dispatched sixteen businesses, a months length a piece, by
an abstract of success: I have congied with the Duke, done my adieu with his
nearest; buried a wife, mourned for her* writ to my Lady mother, I am
returning, entertained my Conuoy, and between these maine parcels of dispatch,
affected many nicer needs: the last was the greatest, but that I have not ended
yet


If the business be of any difficulty, and this morning your departure hence,
it requires have of your Lordship


I mean the business is not ended, as fearing to hear of it hereafter: but
shall we have this dialogue between the Fool and the Soldiour. Come, bring
forth this counterfeit module, ha^s deceived me, like a double-meaning
Prophesier


Bring him forth, has sat in th stocks all night poor gallant knave.


No matter, his heels have deserved it, in usurping his spurs so long. How
does he carry himself


I have told your Lordship already: The stocks carry him. But to answer you
as you would be understood, he weeps like a wench that had shed her milk, he
has confessed himself to Morgan, whom he supposes to be a Friar, from the time
of his remembrance to this very instant disaster of his setting in th stocks:
and what think you he has confessed


Nothing of me, has a?


His confession is taken, and it shall be read to his face, if your Lordshippe
be in it, as I believe you are, you must have the patience to hear it


A plague upon him, muffeld; he can say nothing of me: hush, hush.


Hoodman comes: Portotartarossa.


He calls for the tortures, what will you say without em.


I will confess what I know without constraint,
If ye pinch me like a Pasty, I can say no more.

Bosko Chimurcho.


Boblibindo chicurmurco.


You are a merciful General: Our General bids you answer to what I shall
ask you out of a Note


And truly, as I hope to live.


First demand of him, how many horse the Duke is strong. What say you to that?


Five or six thousand, but very weak and unserviceable: the troops are all
scattered, and the Commanders very poor rogues, upon my reputation and
credit, and as I hope to live


Shall I set down your answer so?


Do, I Will take the Sacrament on it, how and which way you will: all is one to him.


What a past-sauing slave is this?


You Are deceived my Lord, this is Mounsieur Parrolles the gallant militarist,
that was his own phrase that had the whole theoricke of war in the knot of
his scarf, and the practice in the chape of his dagger


I will never trust a man again, for keeping his sword clean, nor believe he
can have every thing in him, by wearing his apparel neatly


Well, that is set down.


Five or six thousand horse I sed, I will say true, or thereabouts set down,
for I Will speak truth


He Is very near the truth in this.


But I con him no thanks for it in the nature he delivers it.


Poor rogues, I pray you say.


Well, that is set down.


I humbly thank you sir, a truth's a truth, the Rogues are maruailous poor.


Demand of him of what strength they are a foot. What say you to that?


By my troth sir, if I were to live this present hour, I will tell true. Let
me see, Spurio a hundred and fifty, Sebastian so many, Corambus so many,
Jacques so many: Guiltian, Cosmo, Lodowicke, and Gratij, two hundred fifty
each: Mine own Company, Chitopher, Vaumond, Bentij, two hundred fifty each:
so that the muster file, rotten and sound, upon my life amounts not to
fifteen thousand pole, half of the which, dare not shake the snow from off
their Cassockes, least they shake themselves to pieces


What shall be done to him?


Nothing, but let him have thanks. Demand of him my condition: and what
credit I have with the Duke


Well that is set down: you shall demand of him, whether one Captain Dumaine
be in th Camp, a Frenchman: what his reputation is with the Duke, what his
valor, honesty, and expertnesse in wars: or whether he thinks it were not
possible with well-waighing sums of gold to corrupt him to a revolt. What say
you to this? What do you know of it


I beseech you let me answer to the particular of the intergatories. Demand
them singly


Do you know this Captain Dumaine?


I know him, a was a Botchers Prentize in Paris, from whence he was whipped for
getting the Shrieues fool with child, a dumb innocent that could not say him
nay


Nay, by your leave hold your hands, though I know his brains are forfeite to
the next tile that falls


Well, is this Captain in the Duke of Florences camp?


Upon my knowledge he is, and lousy.


Nay look not so upon me: we shall hear of your Lord anon.


What is his reputation with the Duke?


The Duke knows him for no other, but a poor Officer of mine, and writ to me
this other day, to turn him out a' th band. I think I have his Letter in my
pocket


Marry we'll search.


In good sadness I do not know, either it is there, or it is upon a file with
the Dukes other Letters, in my Tent


Here it is, here is a paper, shall I read it to you?


I do not know if it be it or no.


Our Interpreter does it well.


Excellently.


Dian, the Counts a fool, and full of gold.


That is not the Dukes letter sir: that is an advertisement to a proper maid
in Florence, one Diana, to take heed of the allurement of one Count
Rossillion, a foolish idle boy: but for all that very ruttish. I pray you sir
put it up again


Nay, I Will read it first by your favor.


My meaning in it I protest was very honest in the behalf of the maid: for I
knew the young Count to be a dangerous and lascivious boy, who is a whale to
Virginity and deuours up all the fry it finds


Damnable both-sides rogue.


When he swears oaths, hid him drop gold, and take it:
After he scores, he never pays the score:
Half won is match well made, match and well make it,
He nere pays after debts, take it before,
And say a soldier (Dian) told thee this:
Men are to mell with, boys are not to kis.
For count of this, the Counts a Fool^ I know it,
Who pays before, but not when he does owe it.
Thine as he vowed to thee in thine ear,

He shall be whipped through the Army with this rhyme in's forehead.


This is your devoted friend sir, the manifold Linguist, and the army-potent
soldier


I could endure any thing before but a Cat, and now he is a Cat to me.


I perceive sir by your Generals looks, we shall be feign to hang you.


My life sir in any case: Not that I am afraid to dye, but that my offenses
being many, I would repent out the remainder of Nature. Let me live sir in a
dungeon, in th stocks, or any where, so I may live


We Will see what may be done, so you confess freely: therefore once more to
this Captain Dumaine: you have answered to his reputation with the Duke, and
to his valor. What is his honesty


He will steal sir an Egg out of a Cloister: for rapes and rauishments he
paralels Nessus. He professes not keeping of oaths, in breaking em he is
stronger then Hercules. He will lie sir, with such volubilitie, that you would
think truth were a fool: drunkenness is his best virtue, for he will be
swine-drunke, and in his sleep he does little harm, save to his bed-cloathes
about him: but they know his conditions, and lay him in straw. I have but
little more to say sir of his honesty, he has every thing that an honest man
should not have; what an honest man should have, he has nothing


I begin to love him for this.


For this description of thine honesty? A pox upon him for me, he is more and
more a Cat


What say you to his expertnesse in war?


Faith sir, has led the drum before the English Tragedians: to belie him I
will not, and more of his souldiership I know not, except in that Country, he
had the honor to be the Officer at a place there called Mile-end, to instruct
for the doubling of files. I would do the man what honor I can, but of this I
am not certain


He has out-villain'd villainy so far, that the raritie redeemes him.


A pox on him, he is a Cat still.


His qualities being at this poor price. I need not to ask you, if Gold will
corrupt him to revolt


Sir, for a Cardceue he will sell the fee-simple of his salvation, the
inheritance of it, and cut the intaile from all remainders, and a perpetual
succession for it perpetually


What Is his Brother, the other Captain Dumain?


Why does he ask him of me?


What Is he?


E'ne a Crow a' th same nest: not altogether so great as the first in
goodness, but greater a great deal in evil. He excels his Brother for a
coward, yet his Brother is reputed one of the best that is. In a retreat he
outrunnes any Lackey; marry in coming on, he has the Crampe


If your life be saved, will you undertake to betray the Florentine.


I, and the Captain of his horse, Count Rossillion.


I Will whisper with the General, and know his pleasure.


I Will no more drumming, a plague of all drums, only to seem to deserve well,
and to beguile the supposition of that lascivious young boy the Count, have I
run into this danger: yet who would have suspected an ambush where I was taken


There is no remedy sir, but you must dye: the General says, you that have so
traitorously discouerd the secrets of your army, and made such pestifferous
reports of men very nobly held, can serve the world for no honest use:
therefore you must dye. Come headesman, off with his head


O Lord sir let me live, or let me see my death.


That shall you, and take your leave of all your friends:
So, look about you, know you any here?

Good morrow noble Captain.


God bless you Captain Parolles.


God save you noble Captain.


Captain, what greeting will you to my Lord Lafew? I am for France.


Good Captain will you give me a Copy of the sonnet you writ to Diana in
behalf of the Count Rossillion, and I were not a very Coward, I Would compel it
of you, but far you well


You are undone Captain all but your scarf, that has a knot on it yet.


Who cannot be crushed with a plot?


If you could find out a Country where but women were that had received so
much shame, you might begin an impudent Nation. Fare ye well sir, I am for
France too, we shall speak of you there


Yet am I thankful: if my heart were great
'Twould burst at this: Captain I Will be no more,
But I will eat, and drink, and sleep as soft
As Captain shall. Simply the thing I am
Shall make me live: who knows himself a braggart
Let him fear this; for it will come to pass,
That every braggart shall be found an Ass.
Rust sword, cool blushes, and Parrolles live
Safest in shame: being fooled, by fool'rie thrive;
There Is place and means for every man alive.
I Will after them.

That you may well perceive I have not wronged you,
One of the greatest in the Christian world
Shall be my surety: for whose throne it is needful
Ere I can perfect mine intents, to kneel.
Time was, I did him a desired office
Dear almost as his life, which gratitude
Through flintie Tartars bosom would peep forth,
And answer thanks. I duly am informed,
His grace is at Marcellae, to which place
We have convenient conuoy: you must know
I am supposed dead, the Army breaking,
My husband hies him home, where heaven ayding,
And by the leave of my good Lord the King,
We Will be before our welcome.

Gentle Madam,
You never had a servant to whose trust
Your business was more welcome.

Nor your Mistress
Ever a friend, whose thoughts more truly labor
To recompense your love: Doubt not but heaven
Has brought me up to be your daughters dower,
As it has fated her to be my motive
And helper to a husband. But O strange men,
That can such sweet use make of what they hate,
When saucy trusting of the cosin'd thoughts
Defiles the pitchy night, so lust does play
With what it loathes, for that which is away,
But more of this hereafter: you Diana,
Under my poor instructions yet must suffer
Something in my behalf.

Let death and honesty
Go with your impositions, I am yours
Upon your will to suffer.

Yet I pray you:
But with the word the time will bring on summer,
When Briars shall have leaves as well as thorns,
And be as sweet as sharp: we must away,
Our Wagon is prepared, and time reuiues us,
All Is well that ends well, still the fines the Crown;
What ere the course, the end is the renown.

No, no, no, your son was misled with a snipt taffata fellow there, whose
villainous saffron would have made all the vnbak'd and dowy youth of a nation in
his color: your daughter-in-law had been alive at this hour, and your son
here at home, more aduanc^d by the King, then by that red-tail'd humble Be I
speak of


I would I had not known him, it was the death of the most virtuous
gentlewoman, that ever Nature had praise for creating. If she had pertaken of
my flesh and cost me the dearest groans of a mother, I could not have owed
her a more rooted love


It Was a good Lady, 'twas a good Lady. We may pick a thousand sallets ere we
light on such another herb


Indeed sir she was the sweet Margerom of the sallet, or rather the herb of
grace


They are not herbs you knave, they are nose-hearbes.


I am no great Nabuchadnezar sir, I have not much skill in grace.


Whether do thou profess thy self, a knave or a fool?


A fool sir at a woman's service, and a knave at a man's.


Your distinction.


I would cosen the man of his wife, and do his service.


So you were a knave at his service indeed.


And I would give his wife my bauble sir to do her service.


I will subscribe for thee, thou art both knave and fool.


At your service.


No, no, no.


Why sir, if I cannot serve you, I can serve as great a prince as you are.


Whose that, a Frenchman?


Faith sir a has an English maine, but his fisnomie is more hotter in France
then there


What prince is that?


The black prince sir, alias the prince of darkness, alias the devil.


Hold thee there is my purse, I give thee not this to suggest thee from thy
master thou talk off, serve him still


I am a woodland fellow sir, that always loved a great fire, and the master I
speak of ever keeps a good fire, but sure he is the Prince of the world, let
his Nobility remain in's Court. I am for the house with the narrow gate,
which I take to be too little for pomp to enter: some that humble themselves
may, but the many will be too chill and tender, and they will be for the flowrie
way that leads to the broad gate, and the great fire


Go thy ways, I begin to be a weary of thee, and I tell thee so before,
because I would not fall out with thee. Go thy ways, let my horses be well
looked too, without any tricks


If I put any tricks upon em sir, they shall be Iades tricks, which are
their own right by the law of Nature


A shrewd knave and an unhappy.


So a is. My Lord that is gone made himself much sport out of him, by his
authority he remains here, which he thinks is a pattent for his
sauciness, and indeed he has no pace, but runs where he will


I like him well, it is not amiss: and I was about to tell you, since I heard
of the good Ladies death, and that my Lord your son was upon his return
home. I moved the King my master to speak in the behalf of my daughter, which
in the minority of them both, his Majesty out of a self gracious remembrance
did first propose, his Highness has promised me to do it, and to stop up
the displeasure he has conceived against your son, there is no fitter
matter. How does your Ladyship like it


With very much content my Lord, and I wish it happily effected.


His Highness comes post from Marcellus, of as able body as when he numbered
thirty, a will be here to morrow, or I am deceived by him that in such
intelligence has seldom failed


Ir reioyces me, that I hope I shall see him ere I die. I have letters that my
son will be here to night: I shall beseech your Lordship to remain with
me, till they meet together


Madam, I was thinking with what manners I might safely be admitted.


You need but plead your honorable privilege.


Lady, of that I have made a bold charter, but I thank my God, it holds yet.


O Madam, yonder is my Lord your son with a patch of velvet on's face, whether
there be a scar vnder't or no, the Velvet knows, but it is a goodly patch of
Velvet, his left cheek is a cheek of two pile and a half, but his right
cheek is worn bare


A scarre nobly got,
Or a noble scarre, is a good liu'rie of honor,
So belike is that.

But it is your carbinado'd face.


Let us go see
your son I pray you, I long to talk
With the young noble soldier.

Faith there is a dozen of em, with delicate fine hats, and most courteous
feathers, which bow the head, and nod at every man


But this exceeding posting day and night,
Must wear your spirits low, we cannot help it:
But since you have made the days and nights as one,
To wear your gentle limbs in my affairs,
Be bold you do so grow in my requital,
As nothing can vnroote you. In happy time,
This man may help me to his Majesty's ear,
If he would spend his power. God save you sir.

And you.


Sir, I have seen you in the Court of France.


I have been sometimes there.


I do presume sir, that you are not fallen
From the report that goes upon your goodness,
And therefore goaded with most sharp occasions,
Which lay nice manners by, I put you to
The use of your own virtues, for the which
I shall continue thankful.

What Is your will?


That it will please you
To give this poor petition to the King,
And aid me with that store of power you have
To come into his presence.

The Kings not here.


Not here sir?


Not indeed,
He hence removed last night, and with more have
Then is his use.

Lord how we loose our pains.


All Is well that ends well yet,
Though time seem so adverse, and means unfit:
I do beseech you, whither is he gone?

Marry as I take it to Rossillion,
Whither I am going.

I do beseech you sir,
Since you are like to see the King before me,
Commend the paper to his gracious hand,
Which I presume shall render you no blame,
But rather make you thank your pains for it,
I will come after you with what good speed
Our means will make us means.

This I Will do for you.


And you shall find your self to be well thankt what e're falls more. We
must to horse again, Go, go, provide


Good Mr Lauatch give my Lord Lafew this letter, I have ere now sir been
better known to you, when I have held familiarity with fresher clothes: but
I am now sir muddied in fortunes mood, and smell somewhat strong of her strong
displeasure


Truly, Fortunes displeasure is but sluttish if it smell so strongly as thou
speak of: I will henceforth eat no Fish of Fortunes butt'ring. Pre thee
allow the wind


Nay you need not to stop your nose sir: I spoke but by a Metaphor.


Indeed sir, if your Metaphor stink, I will stop my nose, or against any man's
Metaphor. Prithee get thee further


Pray you sir deliver me this paper.


Foh, prithee stand away: a paper from fortunes close-stoole, to give to a
Nobleman. Look here he comes himself


Here is a purre of Fortunes sir, or of Fortunes Cat, but not a Muscat, that
has fallen into the unclean fish pond of her displeasure, and as he says is
muddied withal. Pray you sir, use the Carpe as you may, for he looks like a
poor decayed, ingenious, foolish, rascally knave. I do pity his distress
in my smiles of comfort, and leave him to your Lordship


My Lord I am a man whom fortune has cruelly scratched.


And what would you have me to do? It Is too late to pair her nails now.
Wherein have you played the knave with fortune that she should scratch you, who
of her self is a good Lady, and would not have knaves thrive long under?
There Is a Cardecue for you: Let the Justices make you and fortune friends; I am
for other business


I beseech your honor to hear me one single word*


you beg a single penny more: Come you shall ha^t, save your word.


My name my good Lord is Parrolles.


You beg more then word then. Cox my passion, give me your hand: How does
your drum


O my good Lord, you were the first that found me.


Was I insooth? And I was the first that lost thee.


It lies in you my Lord to bring me in some grace for you did bring me out.


Out upon thee knave, do thou put upon me at once both the offiee of God
and the devil: one brings thee in grace, and the other brings thee out. The
Kings coming I know by his Trumpets. Sirrah, inquire further after me, I had
talk of you last night, though you are a fool and a knave, you shall eat, go
too, follow


I praise God for you.


We lost a Jewel of her, and our esteem
Was made much poorer by it: but your son,
As mad in folly, lacked the sense to know
Her estimation home.

It Is past my Liege,
And I beseech your Majesty to make it
Natural rebellion, done in th blade of youth,
When oil and fire, too strong for reasons force,
Ore-beares it, and burns on.

My honored Lady,
I have forgiven and forgotten all,
Though my reuenges were high bent upon him,
And watched the time to shoot.

This I must say,
But first I beg my pardon: the young Lord
Did to his Majesty, his Mother, and his Lady,
Offense of mighty note; but to himself
The greatest wrong of all. He lost a wife,
Whose beauty did astonish the survey
Of richest eyes: whose words all ears took captive,
Whose dear perfection, hearts that scorned to serve,
Humbly called Mistress.

Praising what is lost,
Makes the remembrance dear. Well, call him hither,
We are reconciled, and the first view shall kill
All repetition: Let him not ask our pardon,
The nature of his great offense is dead,
And deeper then oblivion, we do bury
The incensing relics of it. Let him approach
A stranger, no offender; and inform him
So it is our will he should*

I shall my Liege.


What says he to your daughter,
Have you spoke?

All that he is, has reference to your Highness.


Then shall we have a match. I have letters sent me, that sets him high in fame.


He looks well on it.


I am not a day of season,
For thou may see a sunshine, and a hail
In me at once: But to the brightest beams
Distracted clouds give way, so stand thou forth,
The time is fair again.

My high repented blames
Dear Sovereign pardon to me.

All is whole,
Not one word more of the consumed time,
Let Us take the instant by the forward top:
For we are old, and on our quick'st decrees
The inaudible, and noiselesse foot of time
Steals, ere we can effect them. You remember
The daughter of this Lord?

Admiringly my Liege, at first
I stuck my choice upon her, ere my heart
Durst make too bold a herald of my tongue:
Where the impression of mine eye enfixing,
Contempt his scornful Perspectiue did lend me,
Which warpt the line, of every other favor,
Scorned a fair color, or expressed it stolen,
Extended or contracted all proportions
To a most hideous object. Thence it came,
That she whom all men praised, and whom my self,
Since I have lost, have loved; was in mine eye
The dust that did offend it.

Well excused:
That thou did love her, strikes some scores away
From the great count: but love that comes too late,
Like a remorsefull pardon slowly carried
To the great sender, turns a sour offense,
Crying, that is good that is gone: Our rash faults,
Make triuiall price of serious things we have,
Not knowing them, until we know their grave,
Often our displeasures to our selves unjust,
Destroy our friends, and after weep their dust:
Our own love waking, cries to see what is don,e
While shameful hate sleeps out the afternoon.
Be this sweet Helens knell, and now forget her.
Send forth your amorous token for fair Maudlin,
The maine consents are had, and here we will stay
To see our widdowers second marriage day:
Which better then the first, O dear heaven bless,
Or, ere they meet in me, O Nature cesse.

Come on my son, in whom my houses name
Must be digested: give a favor from you
To sparkle in the spirits of my daughter,
That she may quickly come. By my old beard,
And every hair that is on it, Helen that is dead
Was a sweet creature: such a ring as this,
The last that ere I took her leave at Court,
I saw upon her finger.

Hers it was not.


Now pray you let me see it. For mine eye,
While I was speaking, often was fastened to it:
This Ring was mine, and when I gave it Hellen,
I bad her if her fortunes ever stood
Necessitied to help, that by this token
I would relieve her. Had you that craft to reaue her
Of what should stead her most?

My gracious Sovereign,
How ere it pleases you to take it so,
The ring was never hers.

Son, on my life
I have seen her wear it, and she reckoned it
At her lives rate.

I am sure I saw her wear it.


You are deceived my Lord, she never saw it:
In Florence was it from a casement thrown me,
Wrapped in a paper, which contained the name
Of her that threw it: Noble she was, and thought
I stood engaged* but when I had subscribed
To mine own fortune, and informed her fully,
I could not answer in that course of Honor
As she had made the ouerture, she ceast
In heavy satisfaction, and would never
Receive the Ring again.

Platus himself,
That knows the tinct and multiplying medicine,
Has not in natures mystery more science,
Then I have in this Ring. 'Twas mine, 'twas Helens,
Who ever gave it you: then if you know
That you are well acquainted with your self,
Confess 'twas hers, and by what rough enforcement
You got it from her. She called the Saints to surety,
That she would never put it from her finger,
Unless she gave it to your self in bed,
Where you have never come: or sent it us
Upon her great disaster.

She never saw it.


Thou speak it falsely: as I love mine Honor,
And make connecturall fears to come into me,
Which I would feign shut out, if it should prove
That thou art so inhumane, 'twill not prove so:
And yet I know not, thou did hate her deadly,
And she is dead, which nothing but to close
Her eyes my self, could win me to believe,
More then to see this Ring. Take him away,
My fore-past proofs, how ere the matter fall
Shall taze my fears of little vanity,
Having vainly feared too little. Away with him,
We Will sift this matter further.

If you shall prove
This Ring was ever hers, you shall as easy
Prove that I husbanded her bed in Florence,
Where yet she never was.

I am wrap^d in dismal thinkings.


Gracious Sovereign.
Whether I have been too blame or no, I know not,
Here Is a petition from a Florentine,
Who has for four or five remoues come short,
To tender it her self. I undertook it,
Vanquished thereto by the fair grace and speech
Of the poor suppliant, who by this I know
Is here attending: her business looks in her
With an importing visage, and she told me
In a sweet verbal brief, it did concern
Your Highness with her self.

Upon his many protestations to marry me when his wife was dead, I blush to
say it, he won me. Now is the Count Rossillion a Widdower, his vows are
forfeited to me, and my honors paid to him. He stole from Florence, taking
no leave, and I follow him to his Country for Justice: Grant it me, O King, in
you it best lies, otherwise a seducer flourishes, and a poor Maid is undone.

Diana Capilet.



I will buy me a son in Law in a fair, and toule for this. I Will none of him.


The heavens have thought well on thee Lafew,
To bring forth this discou'rie, seek these suitors:
Go speedily, and bring again the Count.
I am a-feard the life of Hellen (Lady)
Was fowly snatched.

Now justice on the doers.


I wonder sir, sir, wives are monsters to you,
And that you fly them as you swear them Lordship,
Yet you desire to marry. What woman's that?

I am my Lord a wretched Florentine,
Derived from the ancient Capilet,
My suite as I do understand you know,
And therefore know how far I may be pitied.

I am her Mother sir, whose age and honor
Both suffer under this complaint we bring,
And both shall cease, without your remedy.

Come hither Count, do you know these Women?


My Lord, I neither can nor will deny,
But that I know them, do they charge me further?

Why do you look so strange upon your wife?


She Is none of mine my Lord.


If you shall marry
You give away this hand, and that is mine,
You give away heavens vows, and those are mine:
You give away my self, which is known mine:
For I by vow am so embodied yours,
That she which marries you, must marry me,
Either both or none.

your reputation comes too short for my daughter, you are no husband for her.


My Lord, this is a fond and desperate creature,
Whom sometime I have laughed with: Let your highness
Lay a more noble thought upon mine honor,
Then for to think that I would sink it here.

Sir for my thoughts, you have them il to friend,
Till your deeds gain them fairer: prove your honor,
Then in my thought it lies.

Good my Lord,
Ask him upon his oath, if he does think
He had not my virginity.

What say thou to her?


She Is impudent my Lord,
And was a common gamester to the Camp.

He does me wrong my Lord: If I were so,
He might have bought me at a common price.
Do not believe him. O behold this Ring,
Whose high respect and rich validity
Did lack a Parallel: yet for all that
He gave it to a Commoner a' th Camp
If I be one.

He blushes, and it is hit:
Of six preceding Ancestors, that Iemme
Conferred by testament to 'th sequent issue
Has it been owed and worn. This is his wife,
That Ring's a thousand proofs.

Me thought you said
You saw one here in Court could witness it.

I did my Lord, but loath am to produce
So bad an instrument, his names Parrolles.

I saw the man to day, if man he be.


Find him, and bring him hither.


What of him:
He Is quoted for a most pe fidious slave
With all the spots a' th world, taxt and debosh'd,
Whose nature sickens: but to speak a truth,
Am I, or that or this for what he will utter,
That will speak any thing.

She has that Ring of yours.


I think she has; certain it is I lyk'd her,
And boorded her in th wanton way of youth:
She knew her distance, and did angle for me,
Madding my eagerness with her restraint,
As all impediments in fancies course
Are motives of more fancy, and in fine,
Her insuite coming with her modern grace,
Subdued me to her rate, she got the Ring,
And I had that which any inferior might
At Market price have bought.

I must be patient:
You that have turned off a first so noble wife,
May justly diet me. I pray you yet,
(Since you lack virtue, I will loose a husband)
Send for your Ring, I will return it home,
And give me mine again.

I have it not.


What Ring was yours I pray you?


Sir much like the same upon your finger.


Know you this Ring, this Ring was his of late.


And this was it I gave him being a bed.


The story then goes false, you threw it him
Out of a Casement.

I have spoke the truth.


My Lord, I do confess the ring was hers.


You boggle shrewdly, every feather starts you:
Is this the man you speak of?

I, my Lord.


Tell me sirrah, but tell me true I charge you,
Not fearing the displeasure of your master:
Which on your just proceeding, I Will keep off,
By him and by this woman here, what know you?

So please your Majesty, my master has bin an honorable Gentleman. Tricks
he has had in him, which Gentlemen have


Come, come, to' the purpose: Did he love this woman?


Faith sir he did love her, but how.


How I pray you?


He did love her sir, as a Gent. loves a Woman.


How is that?


He loved her sir, and loved her not.


As thou art a knave and no knave, what an equivocal Companion is this?


I am a poor man, and at your Majesty's command.


He Is a good drum my Lord, but a naughty Orator.


Do you know he promised me marriage?


Faith I know more then I Will speak.


But will thou not speak all thou know?


Yes so please your Majesty: I did go between them as I said, but more then
that he loved her, for indeed he was mad for her, and talked of Satan, and
of Limbo, and of Furies, and I know not what: yet I was in that credit with
them at that time, that I knew of their going to bed, and of other motions, as
promising her marriage, and things which would derive me ill will to speak
of, therefore I will not speak what I know


Thou have spoken all already, unless thou can say they are married, but
thou art too fine in thy evidence, therefore stand aside. This Ring you say was
yours


I my good Lord.


Where did you buy it? Or who gave it you?


It was not given me, nor I did not buy it.


Who lent it you?


It was not lent me neither.


Where did you find it then?


I found it not.


If it were yours by none of all these ways,
How could you give it him?

I never gave it him.


This woman's an easy glove my Lord, she goes off and on at pleasure.


This Ring was mine, I gave it his first wife.


It might be yours or hers for ought I know.


Take her away, I do not like her now,
To prison with her: and away with him,
Unless thou telst me where thou had this Ring,
Thou die within this hour.

I Will never tell you.


Take her away.


I Will put in bail my liege.


I think thee now some common Customer.


By Jove if ever I knew man 'twas you.


Wherefore have thou accusde him all this while.


Because he is guilty, and he is not guilty:
He knows I am no Maid, and he will swear to it:
I Will swear I am a Maid, and he knows not.
Great King I am no strumpet, by my life,
I am either Maid, or else this old man's wife.

She does abuse our ears, to prison with her.


Good mother fetch my bail. Stay Royal sir,
The Ieweller that owes the Ring is sent for,
And he shall surety me. But for this Lord,
Who has abused me as he knows himself,
Though yet he never harmed me, here I quit him.
He knows himself my bed he has defiled,
And at that time he got his wife with child:
Dead though she be, she feels her young one kick:
So there is my riddle, one that is dead is quick,
And now behold the meaning.

Is there no exorcist
Beguiles the truer Office of mine eyes?
Is It real that I see?

No my good Lord,
It Is but the shadow of a wife you see,
The name, and not the thing.

Both, both, O pardon.


Oh my good Lord, when I was like this Maid,
I found you wondrous kind, there is your Ring,
And look you, heeres your letter: this it says,
When from my finger you can get this Ring,
And is by me with child, etc. This is done,
Will you be mine now you are doubly won?

If she my Liege can make me know this clearly,
I Will love her dearly, ever, ever dearly.

If it appear not plain, and prove untrue,
Deadly divorce step between me and you.
O my dear mother do I see you living?

Mine eyes smell Onions, I shall weep anon:
Good Tom Drum lend me a handkercher.
So I thank thee, wait on me home, I Will make sport with thee: Let thy curtsies
alone, they are scuruy ones

Let us from point to point this story know,
To make the even truth in pleasure flow:
If thou be yet a fresh vncropped flower,
Choose thou thy husband, and I Will pay thy dower.
For I can guess, that by thy honest aid,
Thou keptst a wife her self, thy self a Maid*
Of that and all the progress more and less,
Resolduedly more leisure shall express:
All yet seems well, and if it end so meet,
The bitter past, more welcome is the sweet.

THe Kings a Beggar, now the Play is done,
All is well ended, if this suite be won,
That you express Content: which we will pay,
With strift to please you, day exceeding day:
Ours be your patience then, and yours our parts,
Your gentle hands lends us, and take our hearts.


