NAy, but this dotage of our Generals
Ore-flowes the measure: those his goodly eyes
That over the Files and Musters of the War,
Have glowed like plated Mars:
Now bend, now turn
The Office and Devotion of their view
Upon a Tawny Front. His Captains heart,
Which in the scuffles of great Fights has burst
The Buckles on his breast, reneages all temper,
And is become the Bellows and the Fan
To cool a Gypsies Lust.
Look where they come:
Take but good note, and you shall see in him
(The triple Pillar of the world) transformed
Into a Strumpets Fool. Behold and see.

If it be Love indeed, tell me how much.


There Is beggary in the love that can be reckoned


I Will set a bourne how far to be beloved.


Then must thou needs find our new Heaven, new Earth.


News (my good Lord) from Rome.


Grates me, the sum.


Nay hear them Anthony.
Fuluia perchance is angry: Or who knows,
If the scarse-bearded Caesar have not sent
His powrefull Mandate to you. Do this, or this;
Take in that Kingdom, and Infranchise that:
Perform't, or else we damn thee.

How, my Love?


Perchance? Nay, and most like:
You must not stay here longer, your dismission
Is come from Caesar, therefore hear it Anthony.
Where Is Fuluias Process? ( Caesar's I would say) both?
Call in the Messengers: As I am Egypts Queen,
Thou blushest Anthony, and that blood of thine
Is Caesar's homager: else so thy cheek pays shame,
When shrill-tongu'd Fuluia scolds. The Messengers.

Let Rome in Tyber melt, and the wide Arch
Of the raing'd Empire fall: Here is my space,
Kingdoms are clay: Our dungie earth alike
Feeds Beast as Man; the Nobleness of life
Is to do thus: when such a mutual pair,
And such a twain can do it in which I bind
One pain of punishment, the world to weete
We stand up Peerless.

Excellent falsehood:
Why did he marry Fuluia, and not love her?
I Will seem the Fool I am not. Anthony will be himself.

But stirred by Cleopatra.
Now for the love of Love, and her soft hours,
Let Us not confound the time with Conference harsh;
There Is not a minute of our lives should stretch
Without some pleasure now. What sport to night?

Hear the Ambassadors.


Fie wrangling Queen:
Whom every thing becomes, to chide, to laugh,
To weep: who every passion fully strives
To make it self (in Thee) fair, and admired.
No Messenger but thine, and all alone, to night
We Will wander through the streets, and note
The qualities of people. Come my Queen,
Last night you did desire it. Speak not to us.

Is Caesar with Anthonius prized so slight?


Sir sometimes when he is not Anthony,
He comes too short of that great Property
Which still should go with Anthony.

I am full sorry, that he approues the common Liar, who thus speaks of him at
Rome; but I will hope of better deeds to morrow. Rest you happy


L. Alexas, sweet Alexas, most any thing Alexas, almost most absolute Alexas,
where is the Soothsayer that you praised so to' the Queen? Oh that I knew this
Husband, which you say, must change his Horns with Garlands


Soothsayer.


Your will?


Is this the Man? Is It you sir that know things?


In Natures infinite book of Secrecy, a little I can read.


Show him your hand.


Bring in the Banquet quickly: Wine enough,
Cleopatra's health to drink.

Good sir, give me good Fortune.


I make not, but foresee.


Pray then, foresee me one.


You shall be yet far fairer then you are.


He means in flesh.


No, you shall paint when you are old.


Wrinkles forbid.


Vex not his prescience, be attentive.


Hush.


You shall be more belouing, then beloved.


I had rather heat my Liver with drinking.


Nay, hear him.


Good now some excellent Fortune: Let me be married to three Kings in a
forenoone, and Widow them all: Let me have a Child at fifty, to whom Herod
of Iewry may do Homage. Find me to marry me with Octauius Caesar, and
companion me with my Mistress


You shall out-liue the Lady whom you serve.


Oh excellent, I love long life better then Figs.


You have seen and proved a fairer former fortune, then that which is to
approach


Then belike my Children shall have no names:
Prithee how many Boys and Wenches must I have.

If every of your wishes had a womb, and foretell every wish, a Million.


Out Fool, I forgive thee for a Witch.


You think none but your sheets are privy to your wishes.


Nay come, tell Iras hers.


We Will know all our Fortunes.


Mine, and most of our Fortunes to night, shall be drunk to bed.


There Is a Palm presages Chastity, if nothing else.


E'ne as the o're-flowing Nylus presageth Famine.


Go you wild Bedfellow, you cannot Soothsay.


Nay, if an oily Palm be not a fruitful Prognostication, I cannot scratch
mine ear. Prithee tell her but a worky day Fortune


Your Fortunes are alike.


But how, but how, give me particulars.


I have said.


Am I not an inch of Fortune better then she?


Well, if you were but an inch of fortune better then I: where would you choose
it


Not in my Husbands nose.


Our worser thoughts Heavens mend.


Come, his Fortune, his Fortune. Oh let him mary a woman that cannot go, sweet
Isis, I beseech thee, and let her dye too, and give him a worse, and let worse
follow worse, till the worst of all follow him laughing to his grave,
fifty-fold a Cuckold. Good Isis hear me this Prayer, though thou deny me a
matter of more weight: good Isis I beseech thee


Amen, dear Goddess, hear that prayer of the people. For, as it is a
heartbreaking to see a handsome man loose-Wiu'd, so it is a deadly sorrow, to
behold a foul Knave vncuckolded: Therefore dear Isis keep decorum, and
Fortune him accordingly


Amen.


Lo now, if it lay in their hands to make me a Cuckold, they would make
themselves Whores, but they'ld do it


Hush, here comes Anthony.


Not he, the Queen.


Save you, my Lord.


No Lady.


Was he not here?


No Madam.


He was disposed to mirth, but on the sudden
A Roman thought has struck him.
Enobarbus?

Madam.


Seek him, and bring him hither: where is Alexias?


Here at your service.
My Lord approaches.

We will not look upon him:
Go with us.

Fuluia thy Wife,
First came into the Field.

Against my Brother Lucius?


I: but soon that War had end,
And the times state
Made friends of them, ioynting their force against Caesar,
Whose better issue in the war from Italy,
Upon the first encounter drove them.

Well, what worst.


The Nature of bad news infects the Teller.


When it concerns the Fool or Coward: On.
Things that are past, are done, with me. It Is thus,
Who tells me true, though in his Tale lie death,
I hear him as he flattered.

Labienus (this is stiffe-newes)
Has with his Parthian Force
Extended Asia: from Euphrates his conquering
Banner shook, from Syria to Lydia,
And to Ionia, whilst --

Anthony thou would say.


Oh my Lord.


Speak to me home,
Mince not the general tongue, name
Cleopatra as she is called in Rome:
Rail thou in Fuluia's phrase, and taunt my faults
With such full License, as both Truth and Malice
Have power to utter. Oh then we forth weeds,
When our quick winds lie still, and our illes told us
Is as our earing: fare thee well awhlle.

At your Noble pleasure.


From Scicion how the news? Speak there.


The man from Scicion,
Is there such an one?

He stays upon your will.


Let him appear:
These strong Egyptian Fetters I must break,
Or loose my self in dotage.
What are you?

Fuluia thy wife is dead.


Where dyed she.


In Scicion, her length of sickness,
With what else more serious,
Imports thee to know, this bears.

Forbear me
There Is a great Spirit gone, thus did I desire it:
What our contempts does of ten hurl from us,
We with it ours again. The present pleasure,
By revolution lowering, does become
The opposite of it self: she is good being gone,
The hand could pluck her back, that should her on.
I must from this enchanting Queen break off,
Ten thousand harms, more then the illes I know
My idleness does hatch.
How now Enobarbus.

What Is your pleasure, Sir?


I must with haste from hence.


Why then we kill all our Women. We see how mortal an unkindness is to them,
if they suffer our departure death's the word


I must be gone.


Under a compelling an occasion, let women die. It were pity to cast them away
for nothing, though between them and a great cause, they should be esteemed
nothing. Cleopatra catching but the least noise of this, (...) instantly: I
have seen her dye twenty times upon fa^ ^orer moment: I do think there is
mettle in death, which ^mits some loving act upon her, she has such a
celerity in dying


She is cunning past man's thought.


Alack Sir no, her passions are made of nothing but the finest part of pure
Love. We cannot call her winds and waters, sighs and tears: They are greater
storms and Tempests then Almanackes can report. This cannot be cunning in her;
if it be, she makes a shower of Rain as well as Jove


Would I had never seen her.


Oh sir, you had then left unseen a wonderful piece of work, which not to
have been blessed withal, would have discredited your Travail


Fuluia is dead.


Sir.


Fuluia is dead.


Fuluia?


Dead.


Why sir, give the Gods a thankful Sacrifice: when it pleases their Deities
to take the wife of a man from him, it shows to man the Tailors of the earth:
comforting therein, that when old Robes are worn out, there are members to
make new. If there were no more Women but Fuluia, then had you indeed a cut,
and the case to be lamented: This grief is crowned with Consolation, your old
Smock brings forth a new Petticoate, and indeed the tears live in an Onion,
that should water this sorrow


The business she has broached in the State,
Cannot endure my absence.

And the business you have broached here cannot be without you, especially
that of Cleopatra's, which wholly depends on your abode


No more light Answers:
Let our Officers
Have notice what we purpose. I shall break
The cause of our Expedience to the Queen,
And get her love to part. For not alone
The death of Fuluia, with more urgent touches
Do strongly speak to us: but the Letters too
Of many our contriuing Friends in Rome,
Petition us at home. Sextus Pompeius
Have given the dare to Caesar, and commands
The Empire of the Sea. Our slippery people,
Whose Love is never linked to the deseruer,
Till his deserts are past, begin to throw
Pompey the great, and all his Dignities
Upon his Son, who high in Name and Power,
Higher then both in Blood and Life, stands up
For the maine Soldier. Whose quality going on,
The sides of the world may danger. Much is breeding,
Which like the Coursers heir, has yet but life,
And not a Serpents poison. Say our pleasure,
To such whose places under us, require
Our quick remove from hence.

I shall do it.


Where is he?


I did not see him since.


See where he is,
Whose with him, what he does:
I did not send you. If you find him sad,
Say I am dancing: if in Mirth, report
That I am sudden sick. Quick, and return.

Madam, me thinks if you did love him deerly,
You do not hold the method, to enforce
The like from him.

What should I do, I do not?


In each thing give him way, cross him in nothing.


Thou teach like a fool: the way to lose him.


Tempt him not so too far. I wish forbear,
In time we hate that which we often fear.
But here comes Anthony.

I am sick, and sullen.


I am sorry to give breathing to my purpose.


Help me away dear Charmian, I shall fall,
It cannot be thus long, the sides of Nature
Will not sustain it.

Now my dearest Queen.


Pray you stand farther from me.


What Is the matter?


I know by that same eye there is some good news.
What says the married woman you may go?
Would she had never given you leave to come.
Let her not say it is I that keep you here,
I have no power upon you: Hers you are.

The Gods best know.


Oh never was there Queen
So mightily betrayed: yet at the first
I saw the Treasons planted.

Cleopatra.


Why should I think you can be mine, and true,
(Though you in swearing shake the Throaned Gods)
Who have been false to Fuluia?
Riotous madness,
To be entangled with those mouth-made vows,
Which break themselves in swearing.

Most sweet Queen.


Nay pray you seek no color for your going,
But bid farewell, and go:
When you sued staying,
Then was the time for words: No going then,
Eternity was in our Lips, and Eyes,
Bliss in our brows bent: none our parts so poor,
But was a race of Heaven. They are so still,
Or thou the greatest Soldier of the world,
Art turned the greatest Liar.

How now Lady?


I would I had thy inches, thou should know
There were a heart in Egypt.

Hear me Queen:
The strong necessity of Time, commands
Our Seruicles awhile: but my full heart
Remains in use with you. Our Italy,
Shines over with civil Swords; Sextus Pompeius
Makes his approaches to the Port of Rome,
Equality of two Domesticke powers,
Breed scrupulous faction: The hated grown to strength
Are newly grown to Love: The condemned Pompey,
Rich in his Fathers Honor, creepes apace
Into the hearts of such, as have not thriued
Upon the present state, whose Numbers threaten,
And quietness grown sick of rest, would purge
By any desperate change: My more particular,
And that which most with you should safe my going,
Is Fuluias death.

Though age from folly could not give me freedom
It does from childishness. Can Fuluia dye?

She Is dead my Queen.
Look here, and at thy Sovereign leisure read
The Garboyles she awaked: at the last, best,
See when, and where she died.

O most false Love!
Where be the Sacred Violles thou should fill
With sorrowful water? Now I see, I see,
In Fuluias death, how mine received shall be.

Quarrel no more, but be prepared to know
The purposes I bear: which are, or cease,
As you shall give the advice. By the fire
That quickens Nylus slime, I go from hence
Thy Soldier, Servant, making Peace or War,
As thou affects.

Cut my Lace, Charmian come,
But let it be, I am quickly ill, and well,
So Anthony loves.

My precious Queen forbear,
And give true evidence to his Love, which stands
An honorable Trial.

So Fuluia told me.
I prithee turn aside, and weep for her,
Then bid adieu to me, and say the tears
Belong to Egypt. Good now, play one Scene
Of excellent dissembling, and let it look
Like perfect Honor.

You Will heat my blood no more?


You can do better yet: but this is meetly.


Now by Sword.


And Target. Still he mends.
But this is not the best. Look prithee Charmian,
How this Herculean Roman does become
The carriage of his chafe.

I Will leave you Lady.


Courteous Lord, one word:
Sir, you and I must part, but that is not it:
Sir, you and I have loved, but there is not it:
That you know well, something it is I would:
Oh, my Oblivion is a very Anthony,
And I am all forgotten.

But that your Royalty
Holds Idleness your subject, I should take you
For Idleness it self.

It Is sweating Labor,
To bear such Idleness so near the heart
As Cleopatra this. But Sir, forgive me,
Since my becommings kill me, when they do not
Eye well to you. Your Honor calls you hence,
Therefore be deaf to my vnpittied Folly,
And all the Gods go with you. Upon your Sword
Sit Laurel victory, and smooth success
Be strewn before your feet.

Let us go.
Come: Our separation so abides and flies,
That thou reciding here, goes yet with me;
And I hence fleeting, here remain with thee.
Away.

You may see Lepidus, and henceforth know,
It is not Caesar's Natural vice, to hate
One great Competitor. From Alexandria
This is the news: He fishes, drinks, and wastes
The Lamps of night in revel: Is not more manlike
Then Cleopatra: nor the Queen of Ptolomy
More Womanly then he. Hardly gave audience
Or vouchsafe to think he had Partners. You
Shall find there a man, who is the abstracts of all faults,
That all men follow.

I must not think
There are, evils enough to darken all his goodness:
His faults in him, seem as the Spots of Heaven,
More fiery by nights Blackness; Hereditarie,
Rather then purchaste: what he cannot change,
Then what he chooses.

You are too indulgent. Let Us grant it is not
Amiss to tumble on the bed of Ptolomy,
To give a Kingdom for a Mirth, to sit
And keep the turn of Tippling with a Slave,
To reele the streets at noone, and stand the Buffet
With knaves that smells of sweat: Say this becom^ him
(As his composure must be rare indeed,
Whom these things cannot blemish) yet must Anthony
No way excuse his foyles, when we do bear
So great weight in his lightness. If he filled
His vacancie with his Voluptuousness,
Full surfets, and the dryness of his bones,
Call on him for it. But to confound such time,
That drums him from his sport, and speaks as loud
As his own State, and ours, it is to be chid:
As we rate Boys, who being mature in knowledge,
Pawn their experience to their present pleasure,
And so rebel to judgment.

Here Is more news.


Thy biddings have been done, and every hour
Most Noble Caesar, shall thou have report
How it is abroad. Pompey is strong at Sea,
And it appears, he is beloved of those
That only have feared Caesar: to the Ports
The discontents repair, and men's reports
Give him much wronged.

I should have known no less,
It has bin taught us from the primall state
That he which is was wished, until he were:
And the ebbed man,
Never loved, till never worth love,
Comes feared, by being lacked. This common body,
Like to a Vagabond Flagge upon the Stream,
Goes too, and back, lacking the varrying tide
To rot it self with motion.

Caesar I bring thee word,
Menacrates and Menas famous Pirates
Makes the Sea serve them, which they ear and wound
With keeles of every kind. Many hot inrodes
They make in Italy, the Borders Maritime
Lack blood to think on it, and flush youth revolt,
No Vessel can peep forth: but it is as soon
Taken as seen: for Pompeyes name strikes more
Then could his War resisted.

Anthony,
Leave thy lascivious Vassailes. When thou once
Was beaten from Medena, where thou slew'st
Hirsius, and Pausa Consuls, at thy heel
Did Famine follow, whom thou fought'st against,
(Though daintily brought up) with patience more
Then Savages could suffer. Thou did drink
The stale of Horses, and the gilded Puddle
Which Beasts would cough at. Thy pallat the^ did daine
The roughest Berry, on the rudest Hedge.
Yea, like the Stagge, when Snow the Pasture sheets,
The barks of Trees thou brows'd. On the Alps,
It is reported thou did eat strange flesh,
Which some did dye to look on: And all this
(It wounds thine Honor that I speak it now)
Was borne so like a Soldiour, that thy cheek
So much as lank'd not.

It Is pity of him.


Let his shames quickly
Drive him to Rome, it is time we twain
Did show our selves in the Field, and to that end*
Assemble me immediate counsel, Pompey
Thriues in our Idleness.

To morrow Caesar,
I shall be furnished to inform you rightly
Both what by Sea and Land I can be able
To front this present time.

Til which encounter, it is my business too. Farewell.

Farewell my Lord, what you shall know mean time
Of stirs abroad, I shall beseech you Sir
To let me be partaker.

Doubt not sir, I knew it for my Bond.


Charmian.


Madam.


Ha, ha, give me to drink Mandragora.


Why Madam?


That I might sleep out this great gap of time:
My Anthony is away.

You think of him too much.


O it is Treason.


Madam, I trust not so.


Thou, Eunuch Mardian?


What Is your Highness pleasure?


Not now to hear thee sing. I take no pleasure
In ought an Eunuch has: It Is well for thee,
That being vnseminar'd, thy freer thoughts
May not fly forth of Egypt. Have thou Affections?

Yes gracious Madam.


Indeed?


Not in deed Madam, for I can do nothing
But what in deed is honest to be done:
Yet have I fierce Affections, and think
What Venus did with Mars.

Oh Charmion:
Where think thou he is now? Stands he, or sits he?
Or does he walk? Or is he on his Horse?
Oh happy horse to bear the weight of Anthony!
Do bravely Horse, for wot'st thou whom thou moou'st,
The demi Atlas of this Earth, the Arm
And Burganet of men. He Is speaking now,
Or murmuring, where is my Serpent of old Nyle*
(For so he calls me:) Now I feed my self
With most delicious poison. Think on me
That am with Phoebus amorous pinches black,
And wrinkled deep in time. Broad-fronted Caesar,
When thou was it here above the ground, I was
A morsel for a Monarke: and great Pompey
Would stand and make his eyes grow in my brow,
There would he anchor his Aspect, and dye
With looking on his life.

Sovereign of Egypt, hail.


How much unlike art thou Mark Anthony?
Yet coming from him, that great Medicine has
With his Tinct gilded thee.
How goes it with my brave Mark Anthony?

Last thing he did (dear Qu^ene)
He kissed the last of many doubled kisses
This Orient Pearl. His speech sticks in my heart.

Mine ear must pluck it thence.


Good Friend, quoth he:
Say the firm Roman to great Egypt sends
This treasure of an Oyster: at whose foot
To mend the petty present, I will piece
Her opulent Throne, with Kingdoms. All the East,
(Say thou) shall call her Mistress. So he nodded,
And soberly did mount an Arme-gaunt Steed,
Who neigh'd so hye, that what I would have spoke,
Was beastly dumb by him.

What was he sad, or merry?


Like to the time of the year, between ye extremes
Of hot and cold, he was nor sad* nor merry.

Oh well divided disposition: Note him,
Note him good Charmian, it is the man; but note him.
He was not sad, for he would shine on those
That make their looks by his. He was not merry,
Which seemed to tell them, his remembrance lay
In Egypt with his joy, but between both.
Oh heavenly mingle! Be thou sad, or merry,
The violence of either thee becomes,
So does it no man's else. Met'st thou my Posts?

I Madam, twenty several Messengers.
Why do you send so thick?

Who Is borne that day, when I forget to send to Anthony, shall dye a Beggar.
Ink and paper Charmian. Welcome my good Alexas. Did I Charmian, ever love
Caesar so


Oh that brave Caesar!


Be choked with such another Emphasis,
Say the brave Anthony.

The valiant Caesar.


By Isis, I will give thee bloody teeth,
If thou with Caesar Parago nagaine:
My man of men.

By your most gracious pardon,
I sing but after you.

My Sallad days,
When I was green in judgment, cold in blood,
To say, as I said then. But come, away,
Get me Ink and Paper,
he shall have every day a several greeting, or I Will unpeople Egypt.

If the great Gods be just, they shall assist
The deeds of iustest men.

Know worthy Pompey, that what they do delay, they not deny.


Whiles we are suitors to their Throne, decays the thing we sue for.


We ignorant of our selves,
Beg often our own harms, which the wise Powers
Deny us for our good: so find we profit
By loosing of our Prayers.

I shall do well:
The people love me, and the Sea is mine;
My powers are Cressent, and my Auguring hope
Says it will come to' the full. Mark Anthony
In Egypt sits at dinner, and will make
No wars without doors. Caesar gets money where
He looses hearts: Lepidus flatters both,
Of both is flattered: but he neither loves,
Nor either cares for him.

Caesar and Lepidus are in the field,
A mighty strength they carry.

Where have you this? It Is false.


From Siluius, Sir.


He dreams: I know they are in Rome together
Looking for Anthony: but all the charms of Love,
Salt Cleopatra soften thy wand lip,
Let Witchcraft join with Beauty, Lust with both,
Tie up the Libertine in a field of Feasts,
Keep his Brain fuming. Epicurean Cooks,
Sharpen with cloylesse sauce his Appetite,
That sleep and feeding may prorogue his Honor,
Even till a Lethied dullness --
How now Varrius?

This is most certain, that I shall deliver:
Mark Anthony is every hour in Rome
Expected. Since he went from Egypt, it is
A space for farther Travail.

I could have given less matter
A better ear. Menas, I did not think
This amorous Surfetter would have donn'd his Helm
For such a petty War: His Souldiership
Is twice the other twain: But let us rear
The higher our Opinion, that our stirring
Can from the lap of Egypts Widow, pluck
The near Lust-wearied Anthony.

I cannot hope,
Caesar and Anthony shall well greet together;
His Wife that is dead, did trespasses to Caesar,
His Brother wan'd upon him, although I think
Not moved by Anthony.

I know not Menas,
How lesser Enmities may give way to greater,
Were It not that we stand up against them all:
It Were pregnant they should square between themselves,
For they have entertained cause enough
To draw their swords: but how the fear of us
May Ciment their divisions, and bind up
The petty difference, we yet not know:
Be It as our Gods will haue't; it only stands
Our lives upon, to use our strongest hands
Come Menas.

Good Enobarbus, it is a worthy deed,
And shall become you well, to entreat your Captain
To soft and gentle speech.

I shall entreat him
To answer like himself: if Caesar move him,
Let Anthony look over Caesar's head,
And speak as loud as Mars. By Jupiter,
Were I the wearer of Anthonio's Beard,
I would not shaue't to day.

It Is not a time for private stomacking.


Every time serves for the matter that is then borne in it.


But small to greater matters must give way.


Not if the small come first.


Your speech is passion: but pray you stir
No Embers up. Here comes the Noble Anthony.

And yonder Caesar.


If we compose well here, to Parthia:
Hark Ventidius.

I do not know Mecenas, ask Agrippa.


Noble Friends:
That which combined us was most great, and let not
A leaner action rend us. What Is amiss,
May it be gently heard. When we debate
Our triuiall difference loud, we do commit
Murder in healing wounds. Then Noble Partners,
The rather for I earnestly beseech,
Touch you the sowrest points with sweetest terms,
Nor curstne^e grow to' the matter.

It Is spoken well:
Were we before our Armies, and to fight,
I should do thus.

Welcome to Rome.


Thank you.


Sit.


Sit sir.


Nay then.


I learn, you take things ill, which are not so:
Or being, concern you not.

I must be laughed at, if or for nothing, or a little, I
Should say my self offended, and with you
Chiefly in the world. More laughed at, that I should
Once name you derogately: when to sound your name
It not concerned me.

My being in Egypt Caesar, what was it to you?


No more then my reciding here at Rome
Might be to you in Egypt: yet if you there
Did practice on my State, your being in Egypt
Might be my question.

How intend you, practiced?


You may be pleased to catch at mine intent,
By what did here befall me. Your Wife and Brother
Made wars upon me, and their contestation
Was Theme for you, you were the word of war.

You do mistake your business, my Brother never
Did urge me in his Act: I did inquire it,
And have my Learning from some true reports
That drew their swords with you, did he not rather
Discredit my authority with yours,
And make the wars alike against my stomach,
Having alike your cause. Of this, my Letters
Before did satisfy you. If you will patch a quarrel,
As matter whole you have to make it with,
It must not be with this.

You praise your self, by laying defects of judgment to me: but you patcht up
your excuses


Not so, not so:
I know you could not lack, I am certain on it,
Very necessity of this thought, that I
Your Partner in the cause against which he fought,
Could not with graceful eyes attend those Wars
Which fronted mine own peace. As for my wife,
I would you had her spirit, in such another,
The third oth' world is yours* which with a Snaffle,
You may pace easy, but not such a wife.

Would we had all such wives, that the men might go to Wars with the women.


So much vncurbable, her Garboiles (Caesar)
Made out of her impatience: which not wanted
Shrodenesse of policy to: I greeuing grant,
Did you too much disquiet, for that you must,
But say I could not help it?

I wrote to you, when rioting in Alexandria you
Did pocket up my Letters: and with taunts
Did gibe my Misi^e out of audience.

Sir, he fell upon me, ere admitted, then:
Three Kings I had newly feasted, and did want
Of what I was in the morning: but next day
I told him of my self, which was as much
As to have asked him pardon. Let this Fellow
Be nothing of our strife: if we contend
Out of our question wipe him.

You have broken the Article of your oath, which you shall never have tongue to
charge me with


Soft Caesar.


No Lepidus, let him speak,
The Honor is Sacred which he talks on now,
Supposing that I lackt it: but on Caesar,
The Article of my oath.

To lend me Arms, and aid when I required them, the which you both denied.


Neglected rather:
And then when poisoned hours had bound me up
From mine own knowledge, as nearly as I may,
I Will play the penitent to you. But mine honesty,
Shall not make poor my greatness, nor my power
Work without it. Truth is, that Fuluia,
To have me out of Egypt, made Wars here,
For which my self, the ignorant motive, do
So far a^ke pardon, as befits mine Honor
To stoop in such a case.

It Is Noble spoken.


If it might please you, to enforce no further
The griefs between ye: to forget them quite,
Were to remember: that the present need,
Speaks to atone you.

Worthily spoken Mecenas.


Or if you borrow one another Love for the instant, you may when you hear no
more words of Pompey return it again: you shall have time to wrangle in, when
you have nothing else to do


Thou art a Soldier, only speak no more.


That truth should be silent, I had almost forgot.


You wrong this presence, therefore speak no more.


Go too then: your Considerate stone.


I do not much dislike the matter, but
The manner of his speech: for it cannot be,
We shall remain in friendship, our conditions
So diffring in their acts. Yet if I knew,
What Hoope should hold us staunch from edge to edge
A the world: I would pursue it.

Give me leave Caesar.


Speak Agrippa.


Thou have a Sister by the Mothers side, admired
Octauia. Great Mark Anthony is now a widdower.

Say not, say Agrippa; if Cleopater heard you, your proof were well deserved
of rashness


I am not married Caesar: let me here Agrippa further speak.


To hold you in perpetual amity,
To make you Brothers, and to knit your hearts
With an vn-slipping knot, take Anthony,
Octauia to his wife: whose beauty claims
No worse a husband then the best of men: whose
Virtue, and whose general graces, speak
That which none else can utter. By this marriage,
All little Ielousies which now seem great,
And all great fears, which now import their dangers,
Would then be nothing. Truth's would be tales,
Where now half tales be truth's: her love to both,
Would each to other, and all loves to both
Draw after her. Pardon what I have spoke,
For it is a studied not a present thought,
By duty ruminated.

Will Caesar speak?


Not till he hears how Anthony is touched,
With what is spoke already.

What power is in Agrippa,
If I would say Agrippa, be it so,
To make this good?

The power of Caesar,
And his power, unto Octauia.

May I never
(To this good purpose, that so fairly shows)
Dream of impediment: let me have thy hand
Further this act of Grace: and from this hour,
The heart of Brothers govern in our Loves,
And sway our great Designs.

There Is my hand:
A Sister I bequeath you, whom no Brother
Did ever love so dearly. Let her live
To join our kingdoms, and our hearts, and never
Fly off our Loves again.

Happily, Amen.


I did not think to draw my Sword against Pompey,
For he has laid strange courtesies, and great
Of late upon me. I must thank him only,
Least my remembrance, suffer ill report:
At heel of that, defy him.

Time calls vpon's,
Of us must Pompey presently be sought,
Or else he seeks out us.

Where lies he?


About the Mount-Mesena.


What is his strength by land?


Great, and increasing:
But by Sea he is an absolute Master.

So is the Fame,
Would we had spoke together. Have we for it,
Yet ere we put our selves in Arms, dispatch we
The business we have talked of.

With most gladness,
And do inuit you to my Sisters view,
Whether straight I Will lead you.

Let us Lepidus not lack your company.


Noble Anthony, not sickness should detain me.


Welcome from Egypt Sir.


Half the heart of Caesar, worthy Mecenas. My honorable Friend Agrippa.


Good Enobarbus.


We have cause to be glad, that matters are so well disgested: you staid will
by it in Egypt


I Sir, we did sleep day out of countenance: and made the night light with
drinking


Eight Wilde-Boares roasted whole at a breakfast: and but twelve persons there.
Is this true


This was but as a Fly by an Eagle: we had much more monstrous matter of
Feast, which worthily deserved noting


She Is a most triumphant Lady, if report be square to her.


When she first met Mark Anthony, she purst up his heart upon the River of
Sidnis


There she appeared indeed: or my reporter devised well for her.


I will tell you,
The Barge she sat in, like a burnisht Throne
Burnt on the water: the Poope was beaten Gold,
Purple the Sails: and so perfumed that
The Winds were Loue-sicke.
With them the Owers were Silver,
Which to the tune of Flutes kept stroke, and made
The water which they beat, to follow faster;
As amorous of their strokes. For her own person,
It beggerd all description, she did lie
In her Pauillion, cloth of Gold, of Tissue,
O're-picturing that Venns, where we see
The fancy out-worke Nature. On each side her,
Stood pretty Dimpled Boys, like smiling Cupids,
With diverse coulour'd Fannes whose wind did seem,
To glove the delicate cheeks which they did cool,
And what they undid did.

Oh rare for Anthony.


Her Gentlewoman, like the Nereides,
So many Mer-maides tended her in the eyes,
And made their bends adornings. At the Helm.
A seeming Mer-maide steeres: The Silken Tackle,
Swell with the touches of those Flower-soft hands,
That yarely frame the office. From the Barge
A strange invisible perfume hits the sense
Of the adjacent Wharfes. The City cast
Her people out upon her: and Anthony
Enthroned in the Marketplace, did sit alone,
Whisling to' the air: which but for vacancie,
Had gone to gaze on Cleopater too,
And made a gap in Nature.

Rare Egiptian.


Upon her landing, Anthony sent to her,
Invited her to Supper: she replied,
It should be better, he became her guest:
Which she entreated, our Courteous Anthony,
Whom nere the word of no woman hard speak,
Being barber'd ten times over, goes to the Feast;
And for his ordinary, paies his heart,
For what his eyes eat only.

Royal Wench:
She made great Caesar lay his Sword to bed,
He ploughed her, and she cropped.

I saw her once
Hop forty Paces through the public street.
And having lost her breath, she spoke, and panted,
That she did make defect, perfection*
And breathless power breath forth.

Now Anthony, must leave her utterly.


Never he will not:
Age cannot wither her, nor custom stale
Her infinite variety: other women cloy
The appetites they feed, but she makes hungry,
Where most she satisfies. For vildest things
Become themselves in her, that the holy Priests
Bless her, when she is Riggish.

If Beauty, Wisdom, Modesty, can settle
The heart of Anthony: Octauia is
A blessed Lottery to him.

Let us go. Good Enobarbus, make your self my guest, whilst you abide here.


Humbly Sir I thank you.


The world, and my great office, will
Sometimes divide me from your bosom.

All which time, before the Gods my knee shall bow my ptayers to them for you.


Goodnight Sir. My Octauia
Read not my blemishes in the worlds report:
I have not kept my square, but that to come
Shall all be done by the Rule: good night dear Lady:
Good night Sir.

Goodnight.


Now sirrah: you do wish your self in Egypt?


Would I had never come from thence, nor you thither.


If you can, your reason?


I see it in my motion: have it not in my tongue,
But yet hie you to Egypt again.

Say to me, whose Fortunes shall rise higher Caesar's or mine?


Caesar's, Therefore (oh Anthony) stay not by his side
Thy Demon that thy spirit which keeps thee, is
Noble, Courageous, high unmatchable,
Where Caesar's is not. But near him, ^hy Angel
Becomes a fear: as being o're-powr'd, therefore
Make space enough between you.

Speak this no more.


To none but thee no more but: when to thee,
If thou do play with him at any game,
Thou art sure to loose: And of that Natural luck*
He beats thee against the odds. Thy Luster thickens,
When he shines by: I say again, thy spirit
Is all afraid to govern thee near him:
But he always it is Noble.

Get thee gone:
Say to Ventigius I would speak with him.
He shall to Parthia, be it Art or hap,
He has spoken true. The very Dice obey him,
And in our sports my better cunning faints,
Under his chance, if we draw lots he speeds,
His Cocks do win the Battle, still of mine,
When it is all to naught: and his Quails ever
Beat mine (in hoop^) at odd's. I will to Egypt:
And though I make this marriage for my peace,
IN the East my pleasure lies. Oh come Ventigius.
You must to Parthia, your Commissions ready:
Follow me, and reciue't.

Trouble your selves no further: pray you hasten your Generals after.


Sir* Mark Anthony, will e'ne but kiss Octauia, and we will follow.


Till I shall see you in your Soldiers dress,
Which will become you both: Farewell.

We shall: as I conceive the journey, be at Mount before you Lepidus.


Your way is shorter, my purposes do draw me much about, you will win two days
upon me


Sir good success.


Farewell.


Give me some Music: Music, moody food of us that trade in Love.


The Music, hoa.


Let it alone, let us to Billards: come Charmian.


My arm is sore, best play with Mardian.


As well a woman with an Eunuch plaide, as with a woman. Come you will play with
me Sir


As well as I can Madam.


And when good will is showed,
Though It come to short
The Actor may plead pardon. I Will none now,
Give me mine Angle, we will to' the River there
My Music playing far off. I will betray
Tawny fine fishes, my bended hook shall pierce
Their slimy jaws: and as I draw them up,
I Will think them every one an Anthony,
And say, ah ha; y' are caught.

'Twas merry when you wager'd on your Angling, when your diuer did hang a salt
fish on his hook which he with feruencie drew up


That time? Oh times:
I laughed him out of patience: and that night
I laughed him into patience, and next morn,
Ere the ninth hour, I drunk him to his bed:
Then put my Tires and Mantles on him, whilst
I wore his Sword Phillippan. Oh from Italy,
Ram thou thy fruitful tidings in mine ears,
That long time have bin barren.

Madam, Madam.


Anthonyo's dead.
If thou say so Villain, thou kil'st thy Mistress:
But well and free, if thou so yield him.
There is Gold, and here
My blewest veins to kiss: a hand that Kings
Have lipt, and trembled kissing.

First Madam, he is well.


Why there is more Gold.
But sirrah mark, we use
To say, the dead are well: bring it to that,
The Gold I give thee, will I melt and power
Down thy ill uttering throat.

Good Madam hear me.


Well, go too I will:
But there is no goodness in thy face if Anthony
Be free and healthful; so tart a favor
To trumpet such good tidings. If not well,
Thou should come like a Fury crowned with Snakes,
Not like a formal man.

Wilt please you hear me?


I have a mind to strike thee ere thou speak:
Yet if thou say Anthony lives, it is well,
Or friends with Caesar, or not Captive to him,
I Will set thee in a shower of Gold, and hail
Rich Pearls upon thee.

Madam, he is well.


Well said.


And Friends with Caesar.


The art an honest man.


Caesar, and he, are greater Friends then ever.


Make thee a Fortune from me.


But yet Madam.


I do not like but yet, it does alay
The good precedence, fie upon but yet,
Bur yet is as a Iaylor to bring forth
Some monstrous Malefactor. Prithee Friend,
Power out the pack of matter to mine ear,
The good and bad together: he is friends with Caesar,
In state of health thou say, and thou say, free.

Free Madam, no: I made no such report,
He Is bound unto Octauia.

For what good turn?


For the best turn in the bed.


I am pale Charmian.


Madam, he is married to Octauia.


The most infectious Pestilence upon thee.


Good Madam patience.


What say you?
Hence horrible Villain, o^ ^le spurn thine eyes
Like balls before me: I Will vnhaire thy head,
Thou shall be whipped with Wire, and stewed in brine,
Smarting in lingering pickle.

Gracious Madam,
I that do bring the news, made not the match.

Say it is not so, a Province I will give thee,
And make thy Fortunes proud: the blow thou had
Shall make thy peace, for moving me to rage,
And I will boot thee with what gift beside
Thy modesty can beg.

He Is married Madam.


Rogue, thou have lived too long.


Nay then I Will run:
What mean you Madam, I have made no fault.

Good Madam keep your self within your self,
The man is innocent.

Some Innocents escape not the thunderbolt:
Melt Egypt into Nyle: and kindly creatures
Turn all to Serpents. Call the slave again,
Though I am mad, I will not byte him: Call?

He is afeard to come.


I will not hurt him,
These hands do lack Nobility, that they strike
A meaner then my self: since I my self
Have given my self the cause. Come hither Sir.
Though it be honest, it is never good
To bring bad news: give to a gracious Message
An host of tongues, but let ill tidings tell
Themselves, when they be felt.

I have done my duty.


Is he married?
I cannot hate thee worser then I do,
If thou again say yes.

He Is married Madam.


The Gods confound thee,
Do thou hold there still?

Should I lie Madame?


Oh, I would thou did:
So half my Egypt were submerg'd and made
A Cesterne for scaled Snakes. Go get thee hence,
Had thou Narcissus in thy face to me,
Thou would appear most ugly: He is married?

I crave your Highness pardon.


He is married?


Take no offense, that I would not offend you,
To punnish me for what you make me do
Seems much unequal, he is married to Octauia.

Oh that his fault should make a knave of thee,
That art not what the art sure of. Get thee hence,
The Merchandise which thou have brought from Rome
Are all too dear for me:
Lie they upon thy hand, and be undone by em.

Good your Highness patience.


In praising Anthony, I have disprais'd Caesar.


Many times Madam.


I am paid for it now: lead me from hence,
I faint, oh Iras, Charmian: it is no matter.
Go to the Fellow, good Alexas bid him
Report the feature of Octauia: her years,
Her inclination, let him not leave out
The color of her hair. Bring me word quickly,
Let him for ever go, let him not Charmian,
Though he be painted one way like a Gorgon,
The other ways a Mars. Bid you Alexas
Bring me word, how tall she is: pity me Charmian,
But do not speak to me. Lead me to my Chamber.

Your Hostages I have, so have you mine:
And we shall talk before we fight.

Most meet that first we come to words,
And therefore have we
Our written purposes before us sent,
Which if thou have considered, let us know,
If 'twill tie up thy discontented Sword,
And carry back to Cicelie much tall youth,
That else must perish here.

To you all three,
The Senators alone of this great world,
Chief Factors for the Gods. I do not know,
Wherefore my Father should reuengers want,
Having a Son and Friends, since Julius Caesar,
Who at Phillippi the good Brutus ghosted,
There saw you laboring for him. What was it
That moved pale Cassius to conspire? And what
Made all-honor'd, honest, Roman Brutus,
With the armed rest, Courtiers of beauteous freedom,
To drench the Capitol, but that they would
Have one man but a man, and that his it
Has made me rigge my Navy. At whose burden,
The angered Ocean fomes, with which I meant
To scourge the ingratitude, that despightfull Rome
Cast on my Noble Father.

Take your time.


Thou can not fear us Pompey with thy sails.
We Will speak with thee at Sea. At land thou know
How much we do o're-count thee.

At Land indeed
Thou do ore count me of my Fatherrs house:
But since the Cuckoo buildes not for himself,
Remain in it as thou may.

Be pleased to tell us,
(For this is from the present now you take)
The offers we have sent you.

There Is the point.


Which do not be entreated too,
But weigh what it is worth embraced

And what may follow to try a larger Fortune.


You have made me offer
Of Cicelie, Sardinia: and I must
Rid all the Sea of Pirates. Then, to send
Measures of Wheat to Rome: this greed upon,
To part with vnhackt edges, and bear back
Our Targes vndinted.

That Is our offer.


Know then I came before you here,
A man prepared
To take this offer. But Mark Anthony,
Put me to some impatience: though I loose
The praise of it by telling. You must know
When Caesar and your Brother were at blows,
Your Mother came to Cicelie, and did find
Her welcome Friendly.

I have heard it Pompey.
And am well studied for a liberal thanks,
Which I do owe you.

Let me have your hand:
I did not think Sir, to have met you here,

The beds in the East are soft, and thanks to you,
That called me timelier then my purpose hither:
For I have gamed by it.

Since I saw you last, there is a change upon you.


Well, I know not,
What counts harsh Fotune cast's upon my face,
But in my bosom shall she never come,
To make my heart her vassaile.

Well met here.


I hope so Lepidus, thus we are agreed:
I crave our composion may be written
And sealed between us,

That Is the next to do.


We Will feast each other, ere we part, and lett's
Draw lots who shall begin.

That will I Pompey.


No Anthony take the lot: but first or last, your fine Egyptian cookerie shall
have the same, I have heard that Julius Caesar, grew fat with feasting there


You have heard much.


I have fair meaning Sir.


And fair words to them.


Then so much have I heard,
And I have heard Appolodorus carried --

No more that: he did so.


What I pray you?


A certain Queen to Caesar in a Matris.


I know thee now, how far'st thou Soldier?


Well, and well am like to do, for I perceive
Four Feasts are toward.

Let me shake thy hand,
I never hated thee: I have seen thee fight,
When I have envied thy behavior.

Sir, I never loved you much, but I have praised ye,
When you have well deserved ten times as much,
As I have said you did.

Enjoy thy plainness,
It nothing ill becomes thee:
Aboard my Gally, I inuit you all.
Will you lead Lords?

Shows the way, sir.


Come.


Thy Father Pompey would never have made this Treaty. You, and I have known
sir


At Sea, I think.


We have Sir.


You have done well by water.


And you by Land.


I will praise any man that will praise me, though it cannot be denied what I
have done by Land


Nor what I have done by water.


Yes something you can deny for your own safety: you have bin a great Thief
by Sea


And you by Land.


There I deny my Land service: but give me your hand Menas, if our eyes had
authority, here they might take two Thieves kissing


All men's faces are true, whatsomere their hands are.


But there is never a fair Woman, has a true Face.


No slander, they steal hearts.


We came hither to fight with you.


For my part, I am sorry it is turned to a Drinking. Pompey does this day laugh
away his Fortune


If he do, sure he cannot weep't back again.


Y' have said Sir, we looked not for Mark Anthony here, pray you, is he
married to Cleopatra


Caesar's Sister is called Octauia.


True Sir, she was the wife of Caius Marcellus.


But she is now the wife of Marcus Anthonius.


Pray 'ye sir.


It Is true.


Then is Caesar and he, for ever knit together.


If I were bound to Divine of this unity, I would not Prophecy so.


I think the policy of that purpose, made more i^ the Marriage, then the love
of the parties


I think so too. But you shall find the band that seems to tie their
friendship together, will be the very strangler of their Amity: Octauia is of
a holy, cold, and still conversation


Who would not have his wife so?


Not he that himself is not so: which is Mark Anthony: he will to his
Egyptian dish again: then shall the sighs of Octauia blow the fire up in
Caesar, and (as I said before) that which is the strength of their Amity, shall
prove the immediate Author of their variance. Anthony will use his affection
where it is. He married but his occasion here


And thus it may be, Come Sir, will you aboard?
I have a health for you.

I shall take it sir: we have used our Throats in Egypt.


Come, let us away.


Here they will be man: some of the their Plants are ill rooted already, the
least wind in the world will blow them down


Lepidus is high Conlord.


They have made him drink Alms drink.


As they pinch one another by the disposition, he cries out, no more;
reconciles them to his entreatie, and himself to' the drink


But it raises the greatet war between him and his discretion.


Why this it is to have a name in great men's Fellowship: I had as live have a
Reed that will do me no service, as a Partizan I could not heave


To be called into a huge Sphere, and not to be seen to move in it, are the
holes where eyes should be, which pitifully disaster the cheeks


Thus do they Sir: they take the flow of the Nyle
By certain scales in the Pyramid: they know
By 'th 'height, the lowness, or the mean: If dearth
Or Foizon follow. The higher Nilus swells,
The more it promises: as it ebbes, the Seedsman
Upon the slime and Ooze scatters his grain,
And shortly comes to Harvest.

Y' have strange Serpents there?


I Lepidus.


Your Serpent of Egypt, is bred now of your mud by the operation of your Sun:
so is your Crocodile


They are so.


Sit, and some Wine: A health to Lepidus.


I am not so well as I should be:
But I Will never out.

Not till you have slept: I fear me you will be in till then.


Nay certainly, I have heard the Ptolomies Pyramisis are very goodly things:
without contradiction I have heard that


Pompey, a word.


Say in mine ear, what is it.


Forsake thy seat I do beseech thee Captain,
And hear me speak a word.

Forbear me till anon.
This Wine for Lepidus.

What manner of thing is your Crocodile?


It is shaped sir like it self, and it is as broad as it has breadth; It is
just so high as it is, and mooues with it own organs. It lives by that which
nourishes it, and the Elements once out of it, it Transmigrates


What color is it of?


Of it own color too.


It Is a strange Serpent.


It Is so, and the tears of it are wet.


Will this description satisfy him?


With the Health that Pompey gives him, else he is a very Epicure.


Go hang sir, hang: tell me of that? Away:
Do as I bid you. Where Is this Cup I called for?

If for the sake of Merit thou will hear me,
Rise from thy stool.

I think the art mad: the matter?


I have ever held my cap off to thy Fortunes.


Thou have served me with much faith: what is else to say? Be jolly Lords.


These Quicke-sands Lepidus,
Keep off, them for you sink.

Will thou be Lord of all the world?


What say thou?


Will thou be Lord of the whole world?
That Is twice.

How should that be?


But entertain it, and though thou think me poor. I am the man will give
thee all the world


Have thou drunk well.


No Pompey, I have kept me from the cup,
Thou art if thou dare be, the earthly Jove:
What ere the Ocean pales, or sky inclippes,
Is thine, if thou will have it.

Show me which way?


These three World-sharers, these Competitors
Are in thy vessel. Let me cut the Cable,
And when we are put off, fall to their throats:
All there is thine.

Ah, this thou should have done,
And not have spoke on it. In me it is villainy,
In thee, 't had bin good service: thou must know,
It Is not my profit that does lead mine Honor:
Mine Honor it, Repent that ere thy tongue,
Has so betraide thine act. Being done unknown,
I should have found it afterward well done,
But must condemn it now: desist, and drink.

For this, I Will never follow
Thy paul'd Fortunes more,
Who seeks and will not take, when once it is offered,
Shall never find it more.

This health to Lepidus.


Bear him ashore,
I Will pledge it for him Pompey.

Here Is to thee Menas.


Enobarbus, welcome.


Fill till the cup be hid.


There Is a strong Fellow Menas.


Why?


A bears the third part of the world man: see not?


The third part, then he is drunk: would it were all, that it might go on
wheels


Drink thou: increase the Reeles.


Come.


This is not yet an Alexandrian Feast.


It ripen's toward it: strike the Vessels hoa.
Here Is to Caesar.

I could well forbear't, it is monstrous labor when I wash my brain, and it
grow fouler


Be a Child of the time.


Possess it, I Will make answer: but I had rather fast from all, four days,
then drink so much in one


Ha my brave Emperor, shall we dance now the Egyptian Backenals, and
celebrate our drink


Let Us have it good Soldier.


Come, let us all take hands,
Till that the conquering Wine has steep't our sense,
In soft and delicate Lethe.

All take hands:
Make battery to our ears with the loud Music,
The while, I Will place you, then the Boy shall sing.
The holding every man shall beat as loud,
As his strong sides can volly.

Come thou Monarch of the Vine,
Plumpie Bacchus, with pinke eyne:
In thy Fattes our Cares be drowned,
With thy Grapes our hairs be Crowned.
Cup us till the world go round,
Cup us till the world go round.

What would you more?
Pompey goodnight. Good Brother
Let me request you of our grauer business
Frowns at this leuitie. Gentle Lords let us part,
You see we have burnt our cheeks. Strong Enobarbe
Is weaker then the Wine, and mine own tongue
Spleet's what it speaks: the wild disguise has almost
Antickt us all. What needs more words? goodnight.
Good Anthony your hand.

I Will try you on the shore.


And shall Sir, gives your hand.


Oh Anthony, you have my Father house.
But what, we are Friends?
Come down into the Boat.

Take heed you fall not Menas: I Will not on shore,
No to my Cabin: these Drums,
These Trumpets, Flutes: what
Let Neptune hear, we bid aloud farewell
To these great Fellows. Sound and be hanged, sound out.

Hoo says a there is my Cap.


Hoa, Noble Captain, come.


Now darting Parthya art thou stroke, and now
Pleased Fortune does of Marcus Crassus death
Make me revenger. Bear the Kings Sons body,
Before our Army, thy Pacorus Orades,
Paies this for Marcus Crassus.

Noble Ventidius,
Whilst yet with Parthian blood thy Sword is warm,
The Fugitive Parthians follow. Spur through Media,
Mesapotamia, and the shelters, whether
The routed fly. So thy grand Captain Anthony
Shall set thee on triumphant Chariots, and
Put Garlands on thy head.

Oh Sillius, Sillius,
I have done enough. A lower place note well
May make too great an act. For learn this Sillius,
Better to leave undone, then by our deed
Acquire too high a Fame, when him we serves away.
Caesar and Anthony have ever won
More in their officer, then person. Sossius
One of my place in Syria, his Lieutenant,
For quick accumulation of renown,
Which he atchiu'd by' the minute, lost his favor.
Who does in the Wars more then his Captain can,
Becomes his Captains Captain: and Ambition
(The Soldiers virtue) rather makes choice of loss
Then gain, which darkens him.
I could do more to do Anthonius good,
But 'twould offend him. And in his offense,
Should my performance perish.

Thou have Ventidius that, without the which a Soldier and his Sword graunts
scarce distinction: thou will write to Anthony


I Will humbly signify what in his name,
That magical word of War we have effected,
How with his Banners, and his well paid ranks,
The nere-yet beaten Horse of Parthia,
We have iaded out of the Field.

Where is he now?


He purposes to Athens, whither with what have
The weight we must convey with his, will permit:
We shall appear before him. On there, pass along.

What are the Brothers parted?


They have dispatched with Pompey, he is gone,
The other three are Sealing. Octauia weeps
To part from Rome: Caesar is sad, and Lepidus
Since Pompey's feast, as Menas says, is troubled
With the Greene-Sicknesse.

It Is a Noble Lepidus.


A very fine one: oh, how he loves Caesar.


Nay but how dearly he adores Mark Anthony.


Caesar? why he is the Jupiter of men.


What Is Anthony, the God of Jupiter?


Spoke you of Caesar? How, the non-pareill?


Oh Anthony, oh thou Arabian Bird!


Would you praise Caesar, say Caesar go no further.


Indeed he plied them both with excellent praises.


But he loves Caesar best, yet he loves Anthony:
Hoo, Hearts, Tongues, Figure,
Scribes, Bards, Poets, cannot
Think speak, cast, write, sing, number: hoo,
His love to Anthony. But as for Caesar,
Kneel down, kneel down, and wonder.

Both he loves.


They are his Shards, and he their Beetle, so:
This is to horse: Adieu, Noble Agrippa.

Good Fortune worthy Soldier, and farewell.


No further Sir.


You take from me a great part of my self:
Use me well in it. Sister, prove such a wife
As my thoughts make thee, and as my farthest Band
Shall pass on thy approofe: most Noble Anthony,
Let not the piece of Virtue which is set
Betwixt us, as the Cyment of our love
To keep it builded, be the Ram to batter
The Fortress of it: for better might we
Have loved without this mean, if on both parts
This be not cherisht.

Make me not offended, in your distrust.


I have said.


You shall not find,
Though you be therein curious, the lest cause
For what you seem to fear, so the Gods keep you,
And make the hearts of Romans serve your ends:
We will here part.

Farewell my dearest Sister, fare thee well,
The Elements be kind to thee, and make
Thy spirits all of comfort: fare thee well.

My Noble Brother.


The Aprill's in her eyes, it is Loves spring,
And these the showers to bring it on: be cheerful.

Sir* look well to my Husbands house: and --


What Octauia?


I Will tell you in your ear.


Her tongue will not obey her heart, nor can
Her ^eart inform her tongue.
The Swannes down feather
That stands upon the Swell at the full of Tide:
And neither way inclines.

Will Caesar weep?


He has a cloud in's face.


He were the worse for that were he a Horse, so is he being a^man.


Why Enobarbus:
When Anthony found Julius Caesar dead,
He cried almost to roaring: And he wept,
When at Phillippi he found Brutus slain.

That year indeed, he was trobled with a rheum,
What willingly he did confound, he wail'd,
Beleeu't till I weep too.

No sweet Octauia,
You shall hear from me still: the time shall not
Out-go my thinking on you.

Come Sir, come,
I Will wrestle with you in my strength of love,
Look here I have you, thus I let you go,
And give you to the Gods.

Adieu, be happy.


Let all the number of the Stars give light
To thy fair way.

Farewell, farewell.


Farewell.


Where is the Fellow?


Half afeard to come.


Go too, go too: Come hither Sir.


Good Majesty: Herod of Jury dare not look upon you, but when you are well
pleased


That Herod's head, I Will have: but how? When Anthony is gone, through whom I
might command it: Come thou near


Most gracious Majesty.


Did thou behold Octauia?


I dread Queen.


Where?


Madam in Rome, I looked her in the face: and saw her led between her Brother,
and Mark Anthony


Is she as tall as me?


She is not Madam.


Did hear her speak?
Is she shrill tongued or low?

Madam, I heard her speak, she is low voic'd.


That Is not so good: he cannot like her long.


Like her? Oh Isis: it is impossible.


I think so Charmian: dull of tongue, and dwarfish
What Majesty is in her gate, remember
If ere thou look on Majesty.

She creepes: her motion, and her station are as one.
She shows a body, rather then a life,
A Statue, then a Breather.

Is this certain?


Or I have no observance.


Three in Egypt cannot make better note.


He Is very knowing, I do perceiu't,
There Is nothing in her yet.
The Fellow has good judgment.

Excellent.


Guess at her years, I prithee.


Madam, she was a widow.


Widow? Charmian, hark.


And I do think she is thirty.


Bear thou her face in mind? is it long or round?


Round, even to faultiness.


For the most part too, they are foolish that are so. Her hair what color?


Brown Madam: and her forehead
As low as she would wish it.

There Is Gold for thee,
Thou must not take my former sharpness ill,
I will employ thee back again: I find thee
Most fit for business. Go, make thee ready,
Our Letters are prepared.

A proper man.


Indeed he is so: I repent me much
That so I harried him. Why me think's by him,
This Creature's no such thing.

Nothing Madam.


The man has seen some Majesty, and should know.


Has he seen Majesty? Isis else defend: and serving you so long.


I have one thing more to ask him yet good Charmian: but it is no matter, thou
shall bring him to me where I will write; all may be well enough


I warrant you Madam.


Nay, nay Octauia, not only that,
That were excusable, that and thousands more
Of semblable import, but he has waged
New Wars against Pompey. Made his will, and read it,
To public ear, spoke scantly of me,
When perforce he could not
But pay me terms of Honor: cold and sickly
He vented then most narrow measure: lent me,
When the best hint was given him: he not looked,
Or did it from his teeth.

Oh my good Lord,
Believe not all, or if you must believe,
Stomach not all. A more unhappy Lady,
If this division chance, never stood between
Praying for both parts:
The good Gods will mock me presently,
When I shall pray: Oh bless my Lord, and Husband,
Undo that prayer, by crying out as loud,
Oh bless my Brother. Husband win, win Brother,
Prays, and distroyes the prayer, no midway
'Twixt these extremes at all.

Gentle Octauia,
Let your best love draw to that point which seeks
Best to preserve it: if I loose mine Honor,
I loose my self: better I were not yours
Then your so branchlesse. But as you requested,
Your self shall go between's, the mean time Lady,
I Will raise the preparation of a War
Shall stain your Brother, make your soonest have,
So your desires are yours.

Thanks to my Lord,
The Jove of power make me most weak, most weak,
You reconciler: Wars 'twixt you twain would be,
As if the world should cleave, and that slain men
Should soader up the Rift.

When it appeeres to you where this begins,
Turn your displeasure that way, for our faults
Can never be so equal, that your love
Can equally move with them. Provide your going,
Choose your own company, and command what cost
Your heart he is mind too.

How now Friend Eros?


There Is strange News come Sir.


What man?


Caesar and Lepidus have made wars upon Pompey.


This is old, what is the success?


Caesar having made use of him in the wars against Pompey: presently denied
him riuality, would not let him partake in the glory of the action, and not
resting here, accuses him of Letters he had formerly wrote to Pompey. Upon his
own appeal seizes him, so the poor thir^ is up, till death enlarge his
Confine


Then would thou had a pair of chaps no more, and throw between them all
the food thou have, they will grind the other. Where Is Anthony


He Is walking in the garden thus, and spurns
The rush that lies before him. Cries Fool Lepidus,
And threats the throat of that his Officer,
That murdered Pompey.

Our great Nauies rig'd.


For Italy and Caesar, more Domitius,
My Lord desires you presently: my News
I might have told heareafter.

'Twill be naught, but let it be: bring me to Anthony.


Come Sir,


Contemning Rome he has done all this, and more
In Alexandria: here is the manner often:
IN the Market place on a Tribunal siluer'd,
Cleopatra and himself in Chaires of Gold
Were publicly enthroned: at the feet sat
Caesarion whom they call my Fathers Son,
And all the unlawful issue, that their Lust*
Since then has made between them. Unto her,
He gave the stablishment of Egypt, made her
Of lower Syria, Cyprus, Lydia, absolute Queen.

This in the public eye?


IN the common show place, where they exercise,
His Sons hither proclaimed the King of Kings,
Great Media, Parthia, and Armenia
He gave to Alexander. To Ptolomy he assigned,
Syria, Silicia, and Phoenetia: she
In the abiliments of the Goddess Isis
That day appeer'd, and often before gave audience,
As it is reported so.

Let Rome be thus informed.


Who queazie with his insolence already,
Will their good thoughts call from him

The people knows it,
And have now received his accusations.

Who does he accuse?


Caesar, and that having in Cicilie
Sextus Pompeius spoiled, we had not rated him
His part of the Isle. Then does he say, he lent me
Some shipping vnrestor'd. Lastly, he frets
That Lepidus of the Triumpherate, should be deposed,
And being that, we detain all his Revenue.

Sir, this should be answered.


It Is done already, and the Messenger gone:
I have told him Lepidus was grown too cruel,
That he his high Authority abused,
And did deserve his change: for what I have conquered,
I grant him part: but then in his Armenia,
And other of his conquered Kingdoms, I demand the like

He Will never yield to that.


Nor must not then be yielded to in this.


Hail Caesar, and my L^ hail most dear Caesar.


That ever I should call thee Castaway.


You have not called me so, nor have you cause.


Why have you* stolen upon us thus? you come not
Like Caesar's Sister, The wife of Anthony
Should have an Army for an Usher, and
The neighes of Horse to tell of her approach,
Long ere she did appear. The trees by' the way
Should have borne men, and expectation fainted,
Longing for what it had not. Nay, the dust
Should have ascended to the Roof of Heaven,
Raised by your populous Troops: But you are come
A Market-maid to Rome, and have prevented
The ostentation of our love; which left vnshewne,
Is often left vnlou'd: we should have met you
By Sea, and Land, supplying every Stage
With an augmented greeting.

Good my Lord,
To come thus was I not constrained, but did it
On my free will. My Lord Mark Anthony,
Hearing that you prepared for War, acquainted
My grieved ear withal: whereon I begged
His pardon for return.

Which soon he granted,
Being an abstract 'tweene his Lust, and him.

Do not say so, my Lord.


I have eyes upon him,
And his affairs come to me on the wind: where is he now?

My Lord, in Athens.


No my most wronged Sister, Cleopatra
Has nodded him to her. He has given his Empire
Up to a Whore, who now are leuying
The Kings of the earth for War. He has assembled,
Bochus the King of Lybia, Archilaus
Of Cappadocia, Philadelphos King
Of Pap^lagonia: the Thracian King Adullas,
King Mauchus of Arabia, King of Pont,
Herod of Iewry* Mithridates King
Of Comagear, Polemen and Amyntas,
The Kings of Mede, and Licoania,
With a more larger List of Scepters.

Aye me most wretched,
That have my heart parted betwixt two Friends,
That does afflict each other.

Welcome hither: your Letters did with-holde our breaking forth
Till we perceived both how you were wrong led,
And we in negligent danger: cheer your heart,
Be you not troubled with the time, which drives
Over your content, these strong necessities,
But let determin^d things to destiny
Hold vnbewayl'd their way. Welcome to Rome,
Nothing more dear to me: You are abused
Beyond the mark of thought: and the high Gods
To do you Justice, makes his Ministers
Of us, and those that love you. Best of comfort,
And ever welcome to us.

Welcome Lady.


Welcome dear Madam,
Each heart in Rome does love and pity you,
Only the adulterous Anthony, most large
In his abominations, turns you off,
And gives his potent Regiment to a Trull
That noyses it against us*

Is it so sir?


Most certain: Sister welcome: pray you
Be ever known to patience. My deer'st Sister.

I will be even with thee, doubt it not.


But why, why, why?


Thou have forespoke my being in these wars,
And say it it not fit.

Well: is it, is it.


If not, denounced against us, why should not we be there in person.


Well, I could reply: if we should serve with Horse and Mares together, the
Horse were merely lost: the Mares would bear a Soldiour and his Horse


What is it you say?


Your presence needs must puzle Anthony,
Take from his heart, take from his Brain, from's time,
What should not then be spared. He is already
Traduced for Leuity, and it is said in Rome,
That Photinus an Eunuch, and your Maids
Manage this war.

Sink Rome, and their tongues rot
That speak against us. A Charge we bear in the War,
And as the president of my Kingdom will
Appear there for a man. Speak not against it,
I will not stay behind.

Nay I have done, here comes the Emperor.


Is it not strange Camidius,
That from Tarrentum, and Brandusium,
He could so quickly cut the Ionian Sea,
And take in Troine. You have heard on it (Sweet?)

Celerity is never more admired,
Then by the negligent.

A good rebuke,
Which might have well becom'd the best of men
To taunt at slacknesse. Camidius, we
Will fight with him by Sea.

By Sea, what else?


Why will my Lord, do so?


For that he dares us to it.


So has my Lord, dared him to single fight.


I, and to wage this Battle at Pharsalia,
Where Caesar fought with Pompey. But these offers
Which serve not for his vantage, he shakes off,
And so should you.

Your Ships are not well manned,
Your Mariners are Militers, Reapers* people
Ingroft by swift Impresse. In Caesar's Fleet,
Are those, that often have against Pompey fought,
Their ships are yare, yours heavy: no disgrace
Shall fall you for refusing him at Sea,
Being prepared for Land.

By Sea, by Sea.


Most worthy Sir, you therein throw away
The absolute Soldiership you have by Land,
Distract your Army, which does most consist
Of Warre-markt-footmen, leave unexecuted
Your own renowned knowledge, quite forgo
The way which promises assurance, and
Give up your self merely to chance and hazard,
From firm Security.

I Will fight at Sea.


I have sixty Sails, Caesar none better.


Our ouer-plus of shipping will we burn,
And with the rest full manned, from the head of Action
Beat the approaching Caesar. But if we fail,
We then can do it at Land.
Thy Business?

The News is true, my Lord, he is descried, Caesar has taken Toryne.


Can he be there in person? It Is impossible
Strange, that his power should be. Camidius,
Our nineteen Legions thou shall hold by Land,
And our twelve thousand Horse. We Will to our Ship,
Away my Thetis.
How now worthy Soldier?

Oh Noble Emperor, do not fight by Sea,
Trust not to rotten plankes: Do you misdoubt
This Sword, and these my Wounds; let the Egyptians
And the Phoenicians go a ducking: we
Have used to conquer standing on the earth,
And fighting foot to foot.

Well, well, away.


By Hercules I think I am in the right.


Soldier thou art: but his whole action grows
Not in the power on it: so our Leaders lead,
And we are Women's men.

You keep by Land the Legions and the Horse whole, do you not?


Marcus Octauius, Marcus Iusteus,
Publicola, and Celius, are for Sea:
But we keep whole by Land. This speed of Caesar's
Carries beyond belief.

While he was yet in Rome.
His power went out in such distractions,
As beguilde all Spies.

Who Is his Lieutenant, hear you?


They say, one Towrus.


Well, I know the man.


The Emperor calls Camidius.


With News the times wit a Labor,
And throws forth each minute, some.

Towrus?


My Lord.


Strike not by Land,
Keep whole, provoke not Battle
Till we have done at Sea. Do not exceed
The Prescript of this Scroule: Our fortune lies
Upon this iumpe.

Set we our Squadrons on yond side of the Hill,
In eye of Caesar's battle, from which place
We may the number of the Ships behold,
And so proceed accordingly.

Naught, naught, al naught, I can behold no longer:
Thantoniad, the Egyptian Admiral,
With all their sixty fly, and turn the Rudder:
To see it, mine eyes are blasted.

Gods, and Goddesses, all the whole synod of them!


What Is thy passion.


The greater Cantle of the world, is lost
With very ignorance, we have kissed away
Kingdoms, and Provinces.

How appears the Fight?


On our side, like the Token'd Pestilence,
Where death is sure. Yon ribaudred Nagge of Egypt,
(Whom Leprosy o're-take) in the midst of the fight,
When vantage like a pair of Twins appeared
Both as the same, or rather outs the elder;
(The Breeze upon her) like a Cow in Inn,
Hoists Sails, and flies.

That I beheld:
Mine eyes did sicken at the sight, and could not.
Endure a further view.

She once being looft,
The Noble ruin of her Magic, Anthony,
Claps on his Sea-wing, and (like a doting Mallard)
Leaving the Fight in height, flies after her:
I never saw an Action of such shame;
Experience, Manhood, Honor, never before,
Did violate so it self.

Alack, alack.


Our Fortune on the Sea is out of breath,
And sinkes most lamentably. Had our General
Bin what he knew himself, it had gone well:
Oh his has given example for our flight,
Most grossly by his own.

I, are you thereabouts? Why then goodnight indeed.


Toward Peloponnesus are they fled.


It Is easy toot,
And there I will attend what further comes.

To Caesar will I render
My Legions and my Horse, six Kings already
Show me the way of yielding.

I Will yet follow
The wounded chance of Anthony, though my reason
Sits in the wind against me.

Hark, the Land bids me tread no more upon it,
It is ashamed to bear me. Friends, come hither,
I am so lated in the world, that I
Have lost my way for ever. I have a ship,
Laden with Gold, take that, divide it: fly,
And make your peace with Caesar.

Fly? Not we.


I have fled my self, and have instructed cowards
To run, and show their shoulders. Friends be gone,
I have my self resolved upon a course,
Which has no need of you. Be gone,
My Treasure's in the Harbor. Take it: Oh,
I followed that I blush to look upon,
My very haites do mutiny: for the white
Reprove the brown for rashness, and they them
For fear, and doting. Friends be gone, you shall
Have Letters from me to some Friends, that will
Sweep your way for you. Pray you look not sad,
Nor make replies of loathnesse, take the hint
Which my despair proclaims. Let them be left
Which leaves it self, to the Seaside straight way;
I will possess you of that ship and Treasure.
Leave me, I pray a little: pray you now,
Nay do so: for indeed I have lost command,
Therefore I pray you, I Will see you by and by.

Nay gentle Madam, to him, comfort him.


Do most dear Queen.


Do, why, what else?


Let me sit down: Oh Juno.


No, no, no, no, no.


See you here, Sir?


Oh fie, fie, fie.


Madam.


Madam, oh good Empress.


Sir, sir.


Yes my Lord, yes; he at Philippi kept
His sword e'ne like a dancer* while I struck
The lean and wrinkled Cassius, and 'twas I
That the mad Brutus ended: he alone
Dealt on Lieutenantry, and no practice had
In the brave squares of War: yet now: no matter.

Ah stand by.


The Queen my Lord, the Queen.


Go to him, Madam, speak to him,
He Is vnqualited with very shame.

Well then, sustain me: Oh.


Most Noble Sir arise, the Queen approaches,
Her head's declined, and death will cease her, but
Your comfort makes the rescue.

I have offended Reputation,
A most unnoble sweruing.

Sir, the Queen.


Oh whether have thou lead me Egypt, see
How I convey my shame, out of thine eyes,
By looking back what I have left behind
Stroy'd in dishonor.

Oh my Lord, my Lord.
Forgive my fearful sails, I little thought
You would have followed.

Egypt, thou knew'st too well,
My heart was to thy Rudder tied by' the strings,
And thou should stowe me after. Over my spirit
The full supremacy thou knew'st, and that
Thy beck, might from the bidding of the Gods
Command me.

Oh my pardon.


Now I must
To the young man send humble Treaties, dodge
And palter in the shifts of lownes, who
With half the bulk of the world played as I pleased,
Making, and marring Fortunes. You did know
How much you were my Conqueror, and that
My Sword, made weak by my affection, would
Obey it on all cause.

Pardon, pardon.


Fall not a tear I say, one of them rates
All that is won and lost: Give me a kiss,
Even this repayes me.
We sent our Schoolmaster, is a come back?
Love I am full of Lead: some Wine
Within there, and our Viands: Fortune knows,
We scorn her most, when most she offers blows.

Let him appear that is come from Anthony.
Know you him.

Caesar, it is his Schoolmaster,
An argument that he is plucked, when hither
He sends so poor a Pinnion of his Wing,
Which had superfluous Kings for Messengers,
Not many Moons gone by.

Approach, and speak.


Such as I am, I come from Anthony:
I was of late as petty to his ends,
As is the Morn^-dew on the Mertle leaf
To his grand Sea.

Be It so, declare thine office.


Lord of his Fortunes he salutes thee, and
Requires to live in Egypt, which not granted
He Lessons his Requests, and to thee sues
To let him breath between the Heavens and Earth
A private man in Athens: this for him.
Next, Cleopatra does confess thy Greatness,
Submits her to thy might, and of thee craves
The Circle of the Ptolomies for her heirs,
Now hazarded to thy Grace.

For Anthony,
I have no ears to his request. The Queen,
Of Audience, nor Desire shall fail, so she
From Egypt drive her all-disgraced Friend,
Or take his life there. This if she perform,
She shall not sue unheard. So to them both.

Fortune pursue thee.


Bring him through the Bands:
To try thy Eloquence, now it is time, dispatch,
From Anthony win Cleopatra, promise
And in our Name, what she requires, add more
From thine invention, offers. Women are not
In their best Fortunes strong; but want will periure
The never touched Vestall. Try thy cunning Thidias,
Make thine own Edict for thy pains, which we
Will answer as a Law.

Caesar, I go.


Observe how Anthony becomes his flaw,
And what thou think his very action speaks
In every power that mooues.

Caesar, I shall.


What shall we do, Enobarbus?


Think, and dye.


Is Anthony, or we in fault for this?


Anthony only, that would make his will
Lord of his Reason. What though you fled,
From that great face of War, whose several ranges
Frighted each other? Why should he follow?
The itch of his Affection should not then
Have nickt his Captain-ship, at such a point,
When half to half the world opposed, he being
The meered question? 'Twas a shame no less
Then was his loss, to course your flying Flagges,
And leave his Navy gazing.

Prithee peace.


Is that his answer?


I my Lord.


The Queen shall then have courtesy,
So she will yield us up.

He says so.


Let her know it. To the Boy Caesar send this grizled head, and he will fill thy
wishes to the brimme
With Principalities.

That head my Lord?


To him again, tell him he wears the Rose
Of youth upon him: from which, the world should note
Something particular: His Coin, Ships, Legions,
May be a Cowards, whose Ministers would prevail
Under the service of a Child, as soon
As in the Command of Caesar. I dare him therefore
To lay his gay Comparisons apart,
And answer me declined* Sword against Sword,
Our selves alone: I Will write it: Follow me.

Yes like enough: hye battel'd Caesar will
Vnstate his happiness, and be Stag'd to' the show
Against a Sworder. I see men's Judgments are
A parcel of their Fortunes, and things outward
Do draw the inward quality after them
To suffer all alike, that he should dream,
Knowing all measures the full Caesar will
Answer his emptiness; Caesar thou have subdu'de
His judgment too.

A Messenger from Caesar.


What no more Ceremony? See my Women,
Against the blown Rose may they stop their nose,
That kneeled unto the Buds. Admit him sir.

Mine honesty, and I, begin to square.
The Loyalty well held to Fools, does make
Our Faith mere folly: yet he that can endure
To follow with Allegiance a fallen Lord,
Does conquer him that did his Master conquer,
And earnes a place in the Story.

Caesar's will.


Hear it apart.


None but Friends: say boldly.


So happily are they Friends to Anthony.


He needs as many (Sir) as Caesar has,
Or needs not us. If Caesar please, our Master
Will leap to be his Friend: For us you know,
Whose he is, we are, and that is Caesar's.

So. Thus then thou most renowned, Caesar entreats,
Not to consider in what case thou stand'st
Further then he is Caesar's.

Go on, right Royal.


He knows that you embrace not Anthony
As you did love, but as you feared him.

Oh.


The scarre's upon your Honor, therefore he
Does pity, as constrained blemishes,
Not as deserved.

He is a God,
And knows what is most right. Mine Honor
Was not yielded, but conquered merely.

To be sure of that, I will ask Anthony.
Sir, sir, thou art so leakie
That we must leave thee to thy sinking, for
Thy dearest quit thee.

Shall I say to Caesar,
What you require of him: for he partly begges
To be desired to give. It much would please him,
That of his Fortunes you should make a staff
To lean upon. But it would warm his spirits
To hear from me you had left Anthony,
And put your self under his shroud, the universal Landlord.

What Is your name?


My name is Thidias.


Most kind Messenger,
Say to great Caesar this in disputation,
I kiss his conquering hand: Tell him, I am prompt
To lay my Crown at's feet, and there to kneel.
Tell him, from his all-obeying breath, I hear^
The doom of Egypt.

It Is your Noblest course:
Wisdom and Fortune combatting together,
If that the former dare but what it can,
No chance may shake it. Give me grace to lay
My duty on your hand.

Your Caesar's Father often,
(When he has mused of taking kingdoms in)
Bestowed his lips on that unworthy place,
As it rained kisses.

Favors? By Jove that thunders. What art thou Fellow?


One that but performs
The bidding of the fullest man, and worthiest
To have command obeyed.

You will be whipped.


Approach there: ah you Kite. Now Gods and devils
Authority melts from me of late. When I cried hoa,
Like Boys unto a musse, Kings would start forth,
And cry, your will. Have you no ears?
I am Anthony yet. Take hence this Jack, and whip him.

It Is better playing with a Lions whelpe,
Then with an old one dying.

Moon and Stars,
Whip him: were twenty of the greatest Tributaries
That do acknowledge Caesar, should I find them
So saucy with the hand of she here, what is her name
Since she was Cleopatra? Whip him Fellows,
Till like a Boy you see him crindge his face,
And whine aloud for mercy. Take him hence.

Mark Anthony.


Tugge him away: being whipped
Bring him again, the Jack of Caesar's shall
Bear us an arrant to him.
You were half blasted ere I knew you: Ha?
Have I my pillow left vnprest in Rome,
Forborne the getting of a lawful Race,
And by a Iem of women, to be abused
By one that looks on Feeders?

Good my Lord.


You have been a boggeler ever,
But when we in our viciousness grow hard
(Oh misery on it) the wise Gods seele our eyes
In our own filth, drop our clear judgments, make us
Adore our errors, laugh at's while we strut
To our confusion.

Oh, is it come to this?


I found you as a Morsel, cold upon
Dead Caesar's Trencher: Nay, you were a Fragment
Of Gneius Pompeyes, besides what hotter hours
Vnregistred in vulgar Fame, you have
Luxuriously picked out. For I am sure,
Though you can guess what Temperance should be,
You know not what it is.

Wherefore is this?


To let a Fellow that will take rewards,
And say, God quit you, be familiar with
My play-fellow, your hand; this Kingly Seal,
And plighter of high hearts. O that I were
Upon the hill of Basan to out-roare
The horned Heard, for I have savage cause,
And to proclaim it ciuilly, were like
A halter'd neck, which does the Hangman thank,
For being yare about him. Is he whipped?

Soundly, my Lord.


Cried he? and begged a Pardon?


He did ask favor.


If that thy Father live, let him repent
Thou was it not made his daughter, and be thou sorry
To follow Caesar in his Triumph, since
Thou have bin whipped. For following him, henceforth
The white hand of a Lady Fever thee,
Shake thou to look on it. Get thee back to Caesar,
Tell him thy entertainment: look thou say
He makes me angry with him. For he seems
Proud and disdainful, harping on what I am,
Not what he knew I was. He makes me angry,
And at this time most easy it is to do it:
When my good Stars, that were my former guides
Have empty left their Orbs, and shot their Fires
Into the Abisme of hell. If he mislike,
My speech, and what is done, tell him he has
Hiparchus, my enfran^hed Bondsman, whom
He may at pleasure whip, or hang, or torture,
As he shall like to quit me. Urge it thou:
Hence with thy stripes, be gone.

Have you done yet?


Alack our Terrene Moon is now Eclipst,
And it portends alone the fall of Anthony.

I must stay his time?


To flatter Caesar, would you mingle eyes
With one that ties his points.

Not know me yet?


Cold-hearted toward me?


Ah (Dear) if I be so,
From my cold heart let Heaven engender hail,
And poison it in the sourse, and the first stone
Drop in my neck: as it determines so
Dissolve my life, the next Caesarian smile,
Till by degrees the memory of my womb,
Together with my brave Egyptians all,
By the discandering of this pelleted storm,
Lie grauelesse, till the Flies and Gnats of Nyle
Have buried them for prey.

I am satisfied:
Caesar sets down in Alexandria, where
I will oppose his Fate. Our force by Land,
Has Nobly held, our seuer'd Navy too
Have knit again, and Fleet, threatening most Sea-like.
Where have thou bin my heart? Do thou hear Lady?
If from the Field I shall return once more
To kiss these Lips, I will appear in Blood,
I, and my Sword, will earne our Chronicle,
There Is hope in it yet.

That Is my brave Lord.


I will be trebble-sinewed, hearted, breathed,
And fight maliciously: for when mine hours
Were nice and lucky, men did ransom lives
Of me for jests: But now, I Will set my teeth,
And send to darkness all that stop me. Come,
Let Us have one other gaudy night: Call to me
All my sad Captains, fill our Bowls once more:
Let Us mock the midnight Bell.

It is my Birthday,
I had thought to have held it poor. But since my Lord
Is Anthony again, I will be Cleopatra.

We will yet do well.


Call all his Noble Captains to my Lord.


Do so, we will speak to them,
And to night I Will force
The Wine peep through their scarres.
Come on (my Queen)
There Is sap in it yet. The next time I do fight
I Will make death love me: for I will contend
Even with his pestilent Syt^e.

Now he will out-stare the Lightning, to be furious
Is to be frighted out of fear, and in that mood
The Dove will pecke the Estridge; and I see still
A diminution in our Captains brain,
Restores his heart; when valor prays in reason,
It eats the Sword it fights with: I will seek
Some way to leave him.

He calls me Boy, and chides as he had power
To beat me out of Egypt. My Messenger
He has whipped with Rods, dares me to personal Combat.
Caesar to Anthony: let the old Russian know,
I have many other ways to dye: mean time]
Laugh at his Challenge.

Caesar must think,
When one so great begins to rage, he is hunted
Even to falling. Give him no breath, but now
Make boot of his distraction: Never anger
Made good guard for it self.

Let our best heads know,
That to morrow, the last of many Battles
We mean to fight. Within our Files there are,
Of those that served Mark Anthony but late,
Enough to fetch him in. See it done,
And Feast the Army, we have store to do it,
And they have earned the waste. Poor Anthony.

He will not fight with me, Domitian?


No?


Why should he not?


He thinks, being twenty times of better fortune,
He is twenty men to one.

To morrow Soldier,
By Sea and Land I Will fight: or I will live,
Or bathe my dying Honor in the blood
Shall make it live again. Woo't thou fight well.

I Will strike, and cry, Take all.


Well said, come on:
Call forth my Household Servants, lets to night
Be bounteous at our Meal. Give me thy hand,
Thou have bin rightly honest, so have thou,
Thou, and thou, and thou: you have served me well,
And Kings have been your fellows.

What means this?


It Is one of those odd tricks which sorrow shoots
Out of the mind.

And thou art honest too:
I wish I could be made so many men,
And all of you clapped up together, in
An Anthony: that I might do you service,
So good as you have done.

The Gods forbid.


Well, my good Fellows, wait on me to night:
Scant not my Cups, and make as much of me*
As when mine Empire was your Fellow too,
And suffered my command.

What does he mean?


To make his Followers weep.


Tend me to night;
May be, it is the period of your duty,
Happily you shall not see me more, or if,
A mangled shadow. Perchance to morrow,
You Will serve another Master. I look on you,
As one that takes his leave. Mine honest Friends,
I turn you not away, but like a Master
Married to your good service, stay till death:
Tend me to night two hours, I ask no more,
And the Gods yield you for it.

What mean you (Sir)
To give them this discomfort? Look they weep,
And I an Ass, am Onyon-ey'd; for shame,
Transform us not to women.

Ho, ho, ho:
Now the Witch take me, if I meant it thus.
Grace grow where those drops fall (my hearty Friends)
You take me in too dolorous a sense,
For I spoke to you for your comfort, did desire you
To burn this night with Torches: Know (my hearts)
I hope well of to morrow, and will lead you,
Where rather I Will expect victorious life,
Then death, and Honor. Let Us to Supper, come,
And drown consideration.

Brother, goodnight: to morrow is the day.


It will determine one way: Fare you well.
Heard you of nothing strange about the streets.

Nothing: what news?


Belike it is but a Rumor, good night to you.


Well sir, good night.


Soldiers, have careful Watch.


And you: Goodnight, goodnight.


Here we: and if to morrow
Our Navy thrive, I have an absolute hope
Our Landmen will stand up.

It Is a brave Army, and full of purpose.


Peace, what noise?


List list.


Hark.


Music in the Air.


Under the earth.


It signs well, does it not?


No.


Peace I say: What should this mean?


It Is the God Hercules, whom Anthony loved,
Now leaves him.

Walk, let us see if other Watchmen
Do hear what we do?

How now Masters?


How now? how now do you hear this?


I, is it not strange?


Do you hear Masters? Do you hear?


Follow the noise so far as we have quarter.
Let Us see how it will give off.

Content: It Is strange.


Eros, mine Armor Eros.


Sleep a little.


No my Chucke. Eros, come mine Armor Eros.
Come good Fellow, put thine Iron on,
If Fortune be not ours to day, it is
Because we brave her. Come.

Nay, I Will help too, Anthony.
What Is this for? Ah let be, let be, thou art
The Armourer of my heart: False, false: This, this,
Sooth-law I Will help: Thus it must be.

Well, well, we shall thrive now.
See thou my good Fellow. Go, put on thy defenses.

Briefly Sir.


Is not this buckled well?


Rarely, rarely:
He that vnbuckle^ this, till we do please
To daft for our Repose, shall hear a storm.
Thou fumblest Eros, and my Queens a Squire
More tight at this, then thou: Dispatch. O Love,
That thou could see my Wars to day and knew'st
The Royal Occupation, thou should see
A Workman in it.
Good morrow to thee, welcome,
Thou look like him that knows a warlike Charge:
To business that we love, we rise betime,
And go to it with delight.

A thousand Sir, early though it be, have on their
Riueted trim, and at the Port expect you.

The Morn is fair: Good morrow General.


Good morrow General.


It Is well blown Lads.
This Morning, like the spirit of a youth
That means to be of note, begins betimes.
So, so: Come give me that, this way, well-sed.
Fare thee well Dame, what ere becomes of me,
This is a Soldiers kiss: rebukeable,
And worthy shameful check it were, to stand
On more Mechanicke Complement, I Will leave thee.
Now like a man of Steel, you that will fight,
Follow me close, I Will bring you to it: Adieu.

Please you retire to your Chamber?


Lead me:
He goes forth gallantly: That he and Caesar might
Determine this great War in single fight;
Then Anthony; but now. Well on.

The Gods make this a happy day to Anthony.


Would thou, and those thy scars had once preuaild
To make me fight at Land.

Had*st thou done so,
The Kings that have revolted, and the Soldier
That has this morning left thee, would have still
Followed thy heels.

Whose gone this morning?


Who? one ever near thee, call for Enobarbus,
He shall not hear thee, or from Caesar's Camp,
Say I am none of thine.

What say thou?


Sir he is with Caesar.


Sir, his Chests and Treasure he has not with him.


Is he gone?


Most certain.


Go Eros, send his Treasure after, do it,
Detain no jot I charge thee: write to him,
(I will subscribe) gentle adieu's, and greetings;
Say, that I wish he never find more cause
To change a Master. Oh my Fortunes have
Corrupted honest men. Dispatch Enobarbus.

Go forth Agrippa, and begin the fight:
Our will is Anthony ^e took alive:
Make it so known.

Caesar, I shall.


The time of universal peace is near:
Prove this a prosperous day, the three ^ook'd world
Shall bear the Olive freely.

Anthony is come into the Field.


Go charge Agrippa,
Plant those that have revolted in the Vant,
That Anthony may seem to spend his Fury
Upon himself.

Alexas did revolt, and went to Iewrij on
Affairs of Anthony, there did dissuade
Great Herod to incline himself to Caesar,
And leave his Master Anthony. For this pains,
Caesar has hanged him: Camindius and the rest
That fell away, have entertainment, but
No honorable trust: I have done ill,
Of which I do accuse my self so forely,
That I will joy no more.

Enobarbus, Anthony
Has after thee sent all thy Treasure, with
His Bounty ouer-plus. The Messenger
Came on my guard, and at thy Tent is now
Unloading of his Mules.

I give it you.


Mock not Enobarbus,
I tell you true: Best you saf't the bringer
Out of the host, I must attend mine Office,
Or would have done't my self. Your Emperor
Continues still a Jove.

I am alone the Villain of the earth,
And feel I am so most. Oh Anthony,
Thou Mine of Bounty, how would thou have paid
My better service, when my turpitude
Thou do so Crown with Gold. This blows my heart,
If swift thought break it not: a swifter mean
Shall out-strike thought, but thought will do it. I feel
I fight against thee: No I will go seek
Some Dit^h, wherein to dye: the foul'st best fits
My latter part of life.

Retire, we have engaged our selves too far:
Caesar himself has work, and our oppression
Exceeds what we expected.

O my brave Emperor, this is fought indeed,
Had we done so at first, we had drouen them home
With clowts about their heads.

Thou bleed'st apace.


I had a wound here that was like a T,
But now it is made an H.

They do retire.


We Will beat 'em into Bench-holes, I have yet
Room for six scotches more.

They are beaten Sir, and our advantage serves
For a fair victory.

Let us score their backs,
And snatch 'em up, as we take Hares behind,
It Is sport to maul a Runner.

I will reward thee
Once for thy sprightly comfort, and ten-fold
For thy good valor. Come thee on.

I Will halt after.


We have beat him to his Camp: Run one
Before, and let the Queen know of our guests: to morrow
Before the Sun shall see's, we will spill the blood
That has to day escaped. I thank you all,
For doughty handed are you, and have fought
Not as you served the Cause, but as't had been
Each man's like mine: you have shown all Hectors.
Enter the City, clip your Wives, your Friends,
Tell them your feats, whilst they with joyful tears
Wash the congealement from your wounds, and kiss
The Honour'd-gashes whole.
Give me thy hand,
To this great Faiery, I Will commend thy acts,
Make her thanks bless thee. Oh thou day of the world,
Chain mine armed neck, leap thou, Attire and all
Through proof of Harness to my heart, and there
Ride on the pants triumphing.

Lord of Lords.
Oh infinite Virtue, comm'st thou smiling from*
The worlds great snare vncaught.

Mine Nightingale,
We have beat them to their Beds.
What Gyrle, though gray
Do something mingle with our younger brown, yet ha we
A Brain that nourishes our Nerves, and can
Get gole for gole of youth. Behold this man,
Commend unto his Lips thy sauouring hand,
Kiss it my Warrior: He has fought to day,
As if a God in hate of Mankind, had
Destroyed in such a shape.

I Will give thee Friend
An Armor all of Gold: it was a Kings.

He has deserved it, were it Carbunkled
Like holy Phoebus Carre. Give me thy hand,
Through Alexandria make a jolly March,
Bear our backed Targets, like the men that owe them.
Had our great Palace the capacity
To Camp this host, we all would sup together,
And drink Carowses to the next days Fate
Which promises Royal peril, Trumpetters
With brazen dinne blast you the Cities ear,
Make mingle with our rattling Tabourines,
That heaven and earth may strike their sounds together,
Applauding our approach.

If we be not releeu'd within this hour,
We must return to' the Court of Guard: the night
Is shiny, and they say, we shall embattaile
By 'th 'second hour in the Morn.

This last day was a shrewd one too's.


Oh bear me witness night.


What man is this?


Stand close, and list him.


Be witness to me (O thou blessed Moon)
When men revolted shall upon Record
Bear hateful memory: poor Enobarbus did
Before thy face repent.

Enobarbus?


Peace: Hark further.


Oh Sovereign Mistress of true Melancholy,
The poisonous dampe of night dispunge upon me,
That Life, a very Rebel to my will,
May hang no longer on me. Throw my heart
Against the flint and hardness of my fault,
Which being dried with grief, will break to powder,
And finish all foul thoughts. Oh Anthony,
Nobler then my revolt is Infamous,
Forgive me in thine own particular,
But let the world rank me in Register
A Master leauer, and a fugitive:
Oh Anthony! Oh Anthony!

Let Us speak to him.


Let Us hear him, for the things he speaks
May concern Caesar.

Let Us do so, but he sleeps.


Swoonds rather, for so bad a Prayer as his
Was never yet for sleep.

Go we to him.


Awake sir, awake, speak to us.


Hear you sir?


The hand of death has raught him.
Hark the Drums demurely wake the sleepers:
Let us bear him to' the Court of Guard: he is of note:
Our hour is fully out.

Come on then, he may recover yet.


Their preparation is to day by Sea,
We please them not by Land.

For both, my Lord.


I would they'ld fight in the Fire, or in the Air,
Wee'ld fight there too. But this it is, our Foot
Upon the hills adjoining to the City
Shall stay with us. Order for Sea is given,
They have put forth the Haven:
Where their appointment we may best discover,
And look on their endeavor.

But being charged, we will be still by Land,
Which as I take it we shall, for his best force
Is forth to Man his Galleys. To the Vales,
And hold our best advantage.

Yet they are not joined:
Where yon'd Pine does stand, I shall discover all.
I Will bring thee word straight, how 'ris like to go.

Swallows have built
In Cleopatra's Sails their nests. The Auguries
Say, they know not, they cannot tell, look grimly*
And dare not speak their knowledge. Anthony,
Is valiant, and dejected, and by starts
His fretted Fortunes give him hope and fear
Of what he has, and has not.

All is lost:
This foul Egyptian has betrayed me:
My Fleet has yielded to the Foe, and yonder
They cast their Caps up, and Carowse together
Like Friends long lost. Triple-turn'd Whore, it is thou
Have sold me to this Nouice, and my heart
Makes only Wars on thee. Bid them all fly:
For when I am revenged upon my Charm,
I have done all. Bid them all fly, be gone.
Oh Sun, thy vprise shall I see no more,
Fortune, and Anthony part here, even here
Do we shake hands? All come to this? The hearts
That pannelled me at heels, to whom I gave
Their wishes, do dis-Candie, melt their sweets
On blossoming Caesar: And this Pine is barkt,
That ouer-top'd them all. Betrayed I am.
Oh this false Soul of Egypt! this grave Charm,
Whose eye beck'd forth my Wars, and called them home:
Whose Bosom was my Crownet, my chief end,
Like a right Gypsy, has at fast and loose
Beguiled me, to the very heart of loss.
What Eros, Eros?
Ah, thou Spell! Auaunt.

Why is my Lord enraged against his Love?


Vanish, or I shall give thee thy deserving,
And blemish Caesar's Triumph. Let him take thee,
And hoist thee up to the shouting Plebeians,
Follow his Chariot, like the greatest spot
Of all thy Sex. Most Monster-like be shown
For poor'st Diminitiues, for Dolts, and let
Patient Octauia, plough thy visage up
With her prepared nails.
It Is well the art gone,
If it be well to live. But better 'twere
Thou fell'st into my fury, for one death
Might have prevented many. Eros, hoa?
The shirt of Nessus is upon me, teach me
Alcides, thou mine Ancestor, thy rage.
Let me lodge Licas on the horns of the Moon,
And with those hands that graspt the heauiest Club,
Subdue my worthiest self: The Witch shall die,
To the young Roman Boy she has sold me, and I fall
Under this plot: She dies for it. Eros hoa?

Help me my women: Oh he is more mad
Then Telamon for his Shield, the Boar of Thessaly
Was never so imbost.

To' the Monument, there lock your self,
And send him word you are dead:
The Soul and Body riue not more in parting,
Then greatness going off.

To' the Monument:
Mardian, go tell him I have slain my self:
Say, that the last I spoke was Anthony,
And word it (prithee) pitteously. Hence Mardian,
And bring me how he takes my death to' the Monument.

Eros, thou yet behold'st me?


I Noble Lord.


Sometime we see a clowd that is Dragonish,
A vapor sometime, like a Bear, or Lion,
A toward Cittadell, a pendant Rock,
A forked Mountain, or blew Promontorie
W^h Trees upon it, that nodde unto the world,
And mock our eyes with Air.
Thou have seen these Signs,
They are black Vespers Pageants.

I my Lord.


That which is now a Horse, even with a thought the Rack dislimes, and makes it
indistinc
As water is in water.

It does my Lord.


My good Knave Eros, now thy Captain is
Even such a body: Here I am Anthony,
Yet cannot hold this visible shape (my Knave)
I made these wars for Egypt, and the Queen,
Whose heart I thought I had, for she had mine:
Which whilst it was mine, had annexed vntoo't
A Million more, (now lost:) she Eros has
Packt Cards with Caesar's, and false played my Glory
Unto an Enemies triumph.
Nay, weep not gentle Eros, there is left us
Our selves to end our selves.
Oh thy vilde Lady, she has robbed me of my Sword.

No Anthony,
My Mistress loved thee, and her Fortunes mingled
With thine entirely.

Hence saucy Eunuch peace, she has betrayed me,
And shall dye the death.

Death of one person, can be paid but once,
And that she has discharged. What thou would do
Is done unto thy hand: the last she spoke
Was Anthony, most Noble Anthony:
Then in the amidst a tearing groan did break
The name of Anthony: it was divided
Between her heart, and lips: she rendered life
Thy name so buried in her.

Dead then?


Dead.


Unarm Eros, the long days task is done,
And we must sleep: That thou depart'st hence safe
Does pay thy labor richly: Go.
Off, pluck off,
The seuen-fold shield of Ajax cannot keep
The battery from my heart. Oh cleave my sides.
Heart, once be stronger then thy Continent,
Crack thy frail Case. Apace Eros, apace;
No more a Soldier: bruised pieces go,
You have bin Nobly borne. From me awhile.
I will o're-take thee Cleopatra, and
Weep for my pardon. So it must be, for now
All length is Torture: since the Torch is out,
Lie down and stray no farther. Now all labor
Marres what it does: yea, very force entangles
It self with strength: Seal then and all is done.
Eros? I come my Queen. Eros? Stay for me,
Where Souls do couch on Flowers, we will hand in hand,
And with our sprightly Port make the Ghostes gaze:
Dido, and her Aeneas shall want Troops,
And all the haunt be ours. Come Eros, Eros.

What would my Lord?


Since Cleopatra dyed,
I have lived in such dishonor, that the Gods
Detest my baseness. I, that with my Sword,
Quartered the World, and over green Neptunes back
With Ships, made Cities; condemn my self, to lack
The Courage of a Woman, less Noble mind
Then she which by her death, our Caesar tells
I am Conqueror of my self. Thou art sworn Eros,
That when the exigent should come, which now
Is come indeed: When I should see behind me
The inevitable prosecution of disgrace and horror,
That on my command, thou then would kill me.
Do It, the time is come: Thou strik'st not me,
It Is Caesar thou defeat'st. Put color in thy Cheek.

The Gods withold me,
Shall I do that which all the Parthian Darts,
(Though Enemy) lost aim, and could not.

Eros,
Would thou be window'd in great Rome, and see
Thy Master thus with pleacht Arms, bending down
His corrigible neck, his face subdu'de
To penetratiue shame; whilst the wheeled seat
Of Fortunate Caesar drawn before him, branded
His Baseness that ensued.

I would not see it.


Come then: for with a wound I must be cured.
Draw that thy honest Sword, which thou have worn
Most useful for thy Country.

Oh sir, pardon me.


When I did make thee free, swor'st you not then
To do this when I bad thee? Do it at once,
Or thy precedent Services are all
But accidents vnpurpos'd. Draw, and come.

Turn from me then that Noble countenance,
Wherein the worship of the whole world lies.

Lo thee.


My sword is drawn.


Then let it do at once
The thing why thou have drawn it.

My dear Master,
My Captain, and my Emperor. Let me say
Before I strike this bloody stroke, Farewell.

It Is said man, and farewell.


Farewell great Chief. Shall I strike now?


Now Eros.


Why there then:
Thus I do escape the sorrow of Anthonies death.

Thrice-Nobler then my self,
Thou teach me: Oh valiant Eros, what
I should, and thou could not, my Queen and Eros
Have by their brave instruction got upon me
A Nobleness in Record. But I will be
A Bridegroom in my death, and run intoo't
As to a Lovers bed. Come then, and Eros,
Thy Master dies thy Scholar; to do thus
I learnt of thee. How, not dead? Not dead?
The Guard, how? Oh dispatch me.

What Is the noise?


I have done my work ill Friends:
Oh make an end of what I have begun.

The Star is fallen.


And time is at his Period.


Alas, and woe.


Let him that loves me, strike me dead.


Not I.


Nor I.


Nor any one.


Thy death and fortunes bid thy folowers sly
This sword but shown to Caesar with this tidings*
Shall enter me with him.

Where Is Anthony?


There Diomed there.


Lives he: will thou not answer man?


Art thou there Diomed?
Draw thy sword, and give me,
Suffising strokes for death.

Most absolute Lord:
My Mistress Cleopatra sent me to thee.

When did she send thee?


Now my Lord.


Where is she?


Locked in her Monument* she had a Prophesying fear
Of what has come to pass: for when she saw
(Which never shall be found) you did suspect
She had disposed with Caesar, and that your rage
Would not be purged, she sent you word she was dead:
But fearing since how it might work, has sent
Me to proclaim the truth, and I am come
I dread, too late.

Too late good Diomed: call my Guard I prithee.


What hoa: the Emperors Guard,
The Guard, what hoa? Come, your Lord calls.

Bear me good Friends where Cleopatra bides,
It Is the last service that I shall command you.

Woe, woe are we sir, you may not live to wear
All your true Followers out.

Most heavy day.


Nay good my Fellows, do not please sharp fate
To grace it with your sorrows. Bid that welcome
Which comes to punish us, and we punish it
Seeming to bear it lightly. Take me up,
I have led you often, carry me now good Friends,
And have my thanks for all.

Oh Charmian, I will never go from hence.


Be comforted dear Madam.


No, I will not:
All strange and terrible events are welcome,
But comforts we despise; our size of sorrow
Proportioned to our cause, must be as great
As that which makes it.
How now? is he dead?

His death's upon him, but not dead.
Look out of th other side your Monument,
His Guard have brought him thither.

Oh Sun,
Burn the great Sphere thou mou'st in, darkling stand
The varrying shore of the world. O Antony, Antony, Antony
Help Charmian, help Iras help: help Friends
Below, let us draw him hither.

Peace,
Not Caesar's Valor has over thrown Anthony,
But Anthonie's has Triumphed on it self.

So it should be,
That none but Anthony should conquer Anthony,
But woe it is so.

I am dying Egypt, dying; only
I here importune death awhile, until
Of many thousand kisses, the poor last
I lay upon thy lips.

I dare not Dear,
Dear my Lord pardon: I dare not,
Least I be taken: not the Imperious show
Of the full-Fortun'd Caesar, ever shall
Be brooch'd with me, if Knife, Drugges, Serpents have
Edge, sting, or operation. I am safe:
Your Wife Octauia, with her modest eyes,
And still Conclusion, shall acquire no Honor
Demuring upon me* but come, come Anthony,
Help me my women, we must draw th^e up*
Assist good Friends.

Oh quick, or I am gone.


Here Is sport indeed:
How heavy weighes my Lord?
Our strength is all gone into heaviness,
That makes the weight. Had I great Juno's power,
The strong winged Mercury should fetch thee up,
And set thee by Jove's side. Yet come a little,
Wishers were ever Fools. Oh come, come, come,
And welcome, welcome. Dye when thou have lived,
Quicken with kissing: had my lips that power,
Thus would I wear them out.

A heavy sight.


I am dying Egypt, dying.
Give me some Wine, and let me speak a little.

No, let me speak, and let me rail so hye,
That the false Huswife Fortune, break her Wheel,
Prouok'd by my offense.

One word (sweet Queen)
Of Caesar seek your Honor, with your safety. Oh.

They do not go together.


Gentle hear me,
None about Caesar trust, but Proculeius.

My Resolution, and my hands, I Will trust,
None about Caesar.

The miserable change now at my end,
Lament nor sorrow at: but please your thoughts
In feeding them with those my former Fortunes
Wherein I lived. The greatest Prince of the world,
The Noblest: and do now not basely dye,
Not Cowardly put off my Helmet to
My Countreyman. A Roman, by a Roman
Valiantly vanquished. Now my Spirit is going,
I can no more.

Noblest of men, woo't dye?
Have thou no care of me, shall I abide
In this dull world, which in thy absence is
No better then a Stye? Oh see my women:
The Crown of the earth does melt. My Lord?
Oh withered is the Garland of the War,
The Soldiers pole is fallen: young Boys and Gyrles
Are level now with men: The odds is gone,
And there is nothing left remarkable
Beneath the visiting Moon.

Oh quietness, Lady.


She Is dead too, our Sovereign.


Lady.


Madam.


Oh Madam, Madam, Madam.


Royal Egypt: Empress.


Peace, peace, Iras.


No more but in a Woman, and commanded
By such poor passion, as the Maid that Milkes,
And does the meanest cha^es. It were for me,
To throw my Scepter at the injurious Gods,
To tell them that this World did equal theyrs,
Till they had stolen our Jewel. All Is but naught:
Patience is sottish, and impatience does
Become a Dog that is mad: Then is it sin,
To rush into the secret house of death,
Ere death dare come to us. How do you Women?
What, what good cheer? Why how now Charmian?
My Noble Gyrles? Ah Women, women! Look
Our Lamp is spent, it is out. Good sirs, take heart,
We Will bury him: And then, what is brave, what is Noble,
Let Us do it after the high Roman fashion,
And make death proud to take us. Come, away,
This case of that huge Spirit now is cold.
Ah Women, Women! Come, we have no Friend
But Resolution, and the breefest end.

Go to him Dollabella, bid him yield,
Being so frustrate, tell him,
He mockes the pawses that he makes.

Caesar, I shall.


Wherefore is that? And what art thou that dare
Appear thus to us?

I am called Decretas,
Mark Anthony I served, who best was worthy
Best to be served: whilst he stood up, and spoke
He was my Master, and I wore my life
To spend upon his haters. If thou please
To take me to thee* as I was to him,
I Will be to Caesar: it you please not, I yield thee up my life.

What is it thou say?


I say (Oh Caesar) Anthony is dead.


The breaking of so great a thing, should make
A greater crack. The round World
Should have shook Lions into civil streets,
And Citizens to their dens. The death of Anthony
Is not a single doom, in the name lay
A moity of the world.

He is dead Caesar,
Not by a public minister of Justice,
Nor by a hired Knife* but that selfe-hand
Which writ his Honor in the Acts it did,
Has with the Courage which the heart did lend it,
Splitted the heart. This is his Sword,
I robbed his wound of it: behold it stained
With his most Noble blood.

Look you sad Friends,
The Gods rebuke me, but it is Tidings
To wash the eyes of Kings.

And strange it is,
That Nature must compel us to lament
Our most persisted deeds.

His taints and Honors, waged equal with him.


A Rarer spirit never
Did steer humanity: but you Gods will give us
Some faults to make us men, Caesar is touched.

When such a spacious Mirror's set before him,
He needs must see him self.

Oh Anthony,
I have followed thee to this, but we do launch
Diseases in our Bodies. I must perforce
Have shown to thee such a declining day,
Or look on thine: we could not stall together,
In the whole world. But yet let me lament
With tears as Sovereign as the blood of hearts,
That thou my Brother, my Competitor,
In top of all design; my Mate in Empire,
Friend and Companion in the front of War,
The Arm of mine own Body, and the Heart
Where mine his thoughts did kindle; that our Stars
Irreconcilable, should divide our equalness to this.
Hear me good Friends,
But I will tell you at some meeter Season,
The business of this man looks out of him,
We Will hear him what he says.
Whence are you?

A poor Egyptian yet, the Queen my mistress
Confined in all, she has her Monument
Of thy intents, desires, instruction,
That she preparedly may frame her self
To' the way she is forced too.

Bid her have good heart,
She soon shall know of us, by some of ours,
How honorable, and how kindly We
Determine for her. For Caesar cannot leave to be ungentle

So the Gods preserve thee.


Come hither Proculeius. Go and say
We purpose her no shame: give her what comforts
The quality of her passion shall require;
Least in her greatness, by some mortal stroke
She do defeat us. For her life in Rome,
Would be eternal in our Triumph: Go,
And with your speediest bring us what she says,
And how you find of her.

Caesar I shall.


Gallus, go you along: where is Dolabella, to second Proculeius?


Dolabella.


Let him alone: for I remember now
How he is imployd: he shall in time be ready.
Go with me to my Tent, where you shall see
How hardly I was drawn into this War,
How calm and gentle I proceeded still
In all my Writings. Go with me, and see
What I can show in this.

My desolation does begin to make
A better life: It Is paltry to be Caesar:
Not being Fortune, he is but Fortunes knave,
A minister of her will: and it is great
To do that thing that ends all other deeds,
Which shackles accedents, and bolts up change;
Which sleeps, and never pallates more the dung,
The beggars Nurse, and Caesar's.

Caesar sends greeting to the Queen of Egypt,
And bids thee study on what fair demands
Thou mean to have him grant thee.

What Is thy name?


My name is Proculeius.


Anthony
Did ^ell me of you, bad me trust you, but
I do not greatly care to be deceived
That have no use for trusting. If your Master
Would have a Queece his beggar, you must tell him,
That Majesty to keep decorum, must*
No less beg then a Kingdom: If he please
To give me conquered Egypt for my Son,
He gives me so much of mine own, as I
Will kneel to him with thanks.

Be of good cheer:
Y' are fallen into a Princely hand, fear nothing,
Make your full reference freely to my Lord,
Who is so full of Grace, that it flows over
On all that need. Let me report to him
Your sweet dependacie, and you shall find
A Conqueror that will pray in aid for kindness,
Where he for grace is kneeled too.

Pray you tell him,
I am his Fortunes Vassal, and I send him
The Greatness he has got. I hourly learn
A Doctrine of Obedience, and would gladly
Look him in the Face.

This I Will report (dear Lady)
Have comfort, for I know your plight is pitied
Of him that caused it.

You see how easily she may be surpised:
Guard her till Caesar come.

Royal Queen.


Oh Cleopatra, thou art taken Queen.


Quick, quick, good hands.


Hold worthy Lady, hold:
Do not your self such wrong, who are in this
Releeu'd, but not betrayed.

What of death too that rids our dogs of languish


Cleopatra, do not abuse my Masters bounty, by
The undoing of your self: Let the World see
His Nobleness well acted, which your death
Will never let come forth.

Where art thou Death?
Come hither come; Come, come, and take a Queen
Worth many Babes and Beggars.

Oh temperance Lady.


Sir, I will eat no meat, I Will not drink sir,
If idle talk will once be necessary
I Will not sleep neither. This mortal house I Will ruin,
Do Caesar what he can. Know sir, that I
Will not wait pinnion'd at your Masters Court,
Nor once be chastic'd with the sober eye
Of dull Octauia. Shall they hoyst me up,
And show me to the showting Varlotarie
Of censuring Rome? Rather a ditch in Egypt.
Be gentle grave unto me, rather on Nylus mudde
Lay me starke-nak'd, and let the water-Flies
Blow me into abhorting; rather make
My Countries high pyramides my Gibbet,
And hang me up in Chains.

You do extend
These thoughts of horror further then you shall
Find cause in Caesar.

Proculeius,
What thou have done, thy Master Caesar knows,
And he has sent for thee: for the Queen,
I Will take her to my Guard.

So Dolabella,
It shall content me best: Be gentle to her,
To Caesar I will speak, what you shall please,
If you will employ me to him.

Say, I would dye.


Most Noble Empress, you have heard of me.


I cannot tell.


Assuredly you know me.


No matter sir, what I have heard or known:
You laugh when Boys or Women tell their Dreams,
Is It not your trick?

I understand not, Madam.


I dreampt there was an Emperor Anthony.
Oh such another sleep, that I might see
But such another man.

If it might please ye.


His face was as the Heavens, and therein stuck
A Sun and Moon, which kept their course, and lighted
The little of the earth.

Most Sovereign Creature.


His legs bestrid the Ocean, his reared arm
Crested the world: His voice was propertied
As all the tuned Spheres, and that to Friends:
But when he meant to quail, and shake the Orb,
He was as rattling Thunder. For his Bounty,
There was no winter in it. An Anthony it was,
That grew the more by reaping: His delights
Were Dolphin-like, they showed his back above
The Element they lived in: In his Livery
Walked Crowns and Crownets: Realms and Islands were
As plates dropped from his pocket.

Cleopatra.


Think you there was, or might be such a man
As this I dreampt of?

Gentle Madam, no.


You Lie up to the hearing of the Gods:
But if there be, nor ever were one such
It Is past the size of dreaming: Nature wants stuff
To vie strange forms with fancy, yet to imagine
An Anthony were Natures piece, against Fancy,
Condemning shadows quite.

Hear me, good Madam:
Your loss is as your self, great; and you bear it
As answering to the weight, would I might never
Ore-take pursu'de success: But I do feel
By the rebound of yours, a grief that suites
My very heart at root.

I thank you sir:
Know you what Caesar means to do with me?

I am loath to tell you what, I would you knew.


Nay pray you sir.


Though he be Honorable.


He Will lead me then in Triumph.


Madam he will, I know it.


Make way there Caesar.


Which is the Queen of Egypt.


It is the Emperor Madam.


Arise, you shall not kneel:
I pray you rise, rise Egypt.

Sir, the Gods will have it thus,
My Master and my Lord I must obey,

Take to you no hard thoughts,
The Record of what injuries you did us,
Though written in our flesh, we shall remember
As things but done by chance.

Sole Sir of the World,
I cannot project mine own cause so well
To make it clear, but do confess I have
Been laden with like frailties, which before
Have often shamed our Sex.

Cleopatra know,
We will extenuate rather then enforce:
If you apply your self to our intents,
Which toward you are most gentle, you shall find
A benefit in this change: but if you seek
To lay on me a Cruelty, by taking
Anthonies course, you shall bereave your self
Of my good purposes, and put your children
To that destruction which I Will guard them from,
If thereon you rely. I Will take my leave.

And may through all the world: it is yours, and we your Scutcheons, and your
signs of Conquest shall Hang in what place you please. Here my good Lord


You shall advise me in all for Cleopatra.


This is the brief: of Money, Plate, and Jewels
I am possessed of, it is exactly valewed,
Not petty things admitted. Where Is Seleucus?

Here Madam.


This is my Treasurer, let him speak (my Lord)
Upon his peril, that I have reserved
To my self nothing. Speak the truth Seleucus.

Madam; I had rather seele my lips,
Then to my peril speak that which is not.

What have I kept back.


Enough to purchase what you have made known


Nay blush not Cleopatra, I approve
Your Wisdom in the deed.

See Caesar: Oh behold,
How pomp is followed: Mine will now be yours,
And should we shift estates, yours would be mine.
The ingratitude of this Seleucus, does
Even make me wild. Oh Slave, of no more trust
Then love that is hyt'd? What go thou back, you shall
Go back I warrant thee: but I Will catch thine eyes
Though they had wings. Slave, Soule-lesse, Villain, Dog.
O rarely base!

Good Queen, let us entreat you.


O Caesar, what a wounding shame is this,
That thou vouchsafing here to visit me,
Doing the Honor of thy Lordlinesse
To one so meek, that mine own Servant should
Parcel the sum of my disgraces, by
Addition of his Envy Say (good Caesar)
That I some Lady trifles have reserved,
Immoment toys, things of such Dignity
As we greet modern Friends withal, and say
Some Nobler token I have kept apart
For Li^i^ and Octauia, to induce
Their mediation, must I be unfolded
With one that I have bred: The Gods! it smites me
Beneath the fall I have. Prithee go hence,
Or I shall show the Cynders of my spirits
Through the Ashes of my chance: Were thou a man,
Thou would have mercy on me.

Forbear Seleucus.


Be it known, that we the greatest are mis-thoght
For things that others do: and when we fall,
We answer others merits, in our name
Are therefore to be pitied.

Cleopatra,
Not what you have reserved, nor what acknowledged
Put we in the Roll of Conquest: still be it yours,
Bestow it at your pleasure, and believe
Caesar's no Merchant, to make prize with you
Of things that Merchants sold. Therefore be cheered,
Make not your thoughts your prisons: No dear Queen,
For we intend so to dispose you, as
Your self shall give us counsel: Feed, and sleep:
Our care and pity is so much upon you,
That we remain^ your Friend, and so adieu.

My Master, and my Lord.


Not so: Adieu.


He words me Gyrles, he words me,
That I should not be Noble to my self.
But hark thee Charmian.

Finish good Lady, the bright day is done,
And we are for the dark.

Hye th^e again,
I have spoke already, and it is provided,
Go put it to the haste.

Madam, I will.


Where Is the Queen?


Behold sir.


Dolabella.


Madam, as thereto sworn, by your command
(Which my love makes Religion to obey)
I tell you this: Caesar through Syria
Intends his journey, and within three days,
You with your Children will he send before,
Make your best use of this. I have performed
Your pleasure, and my promise.

Dolabella, I shall remain your debtor.


I your Servant:
Adieu good Queen, I must attend on Caesar.

Farewell, and thanks.
Now Iras, what think thou?
Thou, an Egyptian Puppet shall be shown
In Rome as well as I: Mechanicke Slaves
With greazie Aprons, Rules, and Hammers shall
Vplift us to the view. In their thick breathes,
Rank of gross diet, shall we be enclowded,
And forced to drink their vapor.

The Gods forbid.


Nay, it is most certain Iras: saucy Lictors
Will catch at us like Strumpets, and scald Rimers
Ballads us out a Tune. The quick Comedians
Extemporally will stage us, and present
Our Alexandrian Revels: Anthony
Shall be brought drunken forth, and I shall see
Some squeaking Cleopatra Boy my greatness
IN the posture of a Whore.

O the good Gods!


Nay that is certain.


I Will never see it? for I am sure mine Nails
Are stronger then mine eyes.

Why that is the way to fool their preparation,
And to conquer their most absurd intents.
Now Charmian.
Show me my Women like a Queen: Go fetch
My best Attyres. I am again for Cidrus,
To meet Mark Anthony. Sir Iras, go
(Now Noble Charmian, we will dispatch indeed,)
And when thou have done this chare, I Will give thee leave
To play till Doomesday: bring our Crown, and all.
Wherefore's this noise?

Here is a rural Fellow,
That will not be deny'de your Highness presence,
He brings you Figs.

Let him come in.
What poor an Instrument
May do a Noble deed: he brings me liberty:
My Resolution's placed, and I have nothing
Of woman in me: Now from head to foot
I am Marble constant: now the fleeting Moon
No Planet is of mine.

This is the man.


Avoid, and leave him.
Have thou the pretty worm of Nylus there,
That killes and pains not?

Truly I have him: but I would not be the party that should desire you to
touch him, for his biting is immortal: those that do dye of it, do seldom
or never recover


Remember'st thou any that have dyed on it?


Very many, men and women too. I heard of one of them no longer then yesterday,
a very honest woman, but something given to lie, as a woman should not do, but
in the way of honesty, how she dyed of the biting of it, what pain she felt:
Truly, she makes a very good report of the worm: but he that will believe all
that they say, shall never be saved by half that they do: but this is most
falliable, the Worme's an odd Worm


Get thee hence, farewell.


I wish you all joy of the Worm.


Farewell.


You must think this (look you,) that the Worm will do his kind.


I, I, farewell.


Look you, the Worm is not to be trusted, but in the keeping of wise people:
for indeed, there is no goodness in the Worm


Take thou no care, it shall be heeded.


Very good: give it nothing I pray you, for it is not worth the feeding.


Will it eat me?


You must not think I am so simple, but I know the devil himself will not
eat a woman: I know, that a woman is a dish for the Gods, if the devil dress
her not. But truly, these same whoreson devils do the Gods great harm in their
women: for in every ten that they make, the devils mar five


Well, get thee gone, farewell.


Yes forsooth: I wish you joy of the worm.


Give me my Robe, put on my Crown, I have
Immortal longings in me. Now no more
The juice of Egypts Grape shall moist this lip.
Yare, yare, good Iras; quick: Me thinks I hear
Anthony call: I see him rowse himself
To praise my Noble Act. I hear him mock
The luck of Caesar, which the Gods give men
To excuse their after wrath. Husband, I come:
Now to that name, my Courage prove my Title.
I am Fire, and Air; my other Elements
I give to baser life. So, have you done?
Come then, and take the last warmth of my Lips.
Farewell kind Charmian, Iras, long farewell.
Have I the Aspicke in my lips? Do fall?
If thou, and Nature can so gently part,
The stroke of death is as a Lovers pinch,
Which hurts, and is desired. Do thou lie still?
If thus thou vanishest, thou tell the world,
It is not worth leaue-taking.

Dissolve thick clowd, and Rain, that I may say
The Gods themselves do weep.

This proves me base:
If she first meet the Curled Anthony.
He Will make demand of her, and spend that kiss
Which is my heaven to have. Come thou mortal wretch,
With thy sharp teeth this knot intrinsicate,
Of life at once untie: Poor venomous Fool,
Be angry, and dispatch. Oh could thou speak,
That I might hear thee call great Caesar Ass, vnpolicied.

Oh Eastern Star.


Peace, peace:
Do thou not see my Baby at my breast,
That suckes the Nurse asleep.

O break! O break!


As sweet as Balm, as soft as Air, as gentle.
O Anthony! Nay I will take thee too.
What should I stay --

In this wild World? So fare thee well:
Now boast thee Death, in thy possession lies
A Less vnparalell'd. Downie Windows cloze,
And golden Phoebus, never be beheld
Of eyes again so Royal: your Crowns away,
I Will mend it, and then play --

Where Is the Queen?


Speak softly, wake her not.


Caesar has sent


Too slow a Messenger.
Oh come apace, dispatch, I partly feel thee.

Approach hoa,
All Is not well: Caesar's beguild.

There Is Dolabella sent from Caesar: call him.


What work is here Charmian?
Is this well done?

It is well done, and fitting for a Princess
Descended of so many Royal Kings.
Ah Soldier.

How goes it here?


All dead.


Caesar, thy thoughts
Touch their effects in this: Thy self art coming
To see performed the dreaded Act which thou
So sought'st to hinder.

A way there, a way for Caesar.


Oh sir, you are too sure an Augurer:
That you did fe^re, is done.

Brauest at the last,
She leuell'd at our purposes, and being Royal
Took her own way: the manner of their deaths,
I do not see them bleed.

Who was last with them?


A simple Countryman, that brought her Figs:
This was his Basket.

Poisoned then.


Oh Caesar:
This Charmian lived but now, she stood and spoke:
I found her trimming up the Diadem;
On her dead Mistress tremblingly she stood,
And on the sudden dropped.

Oh Noble weakness:
If they had swallowed poison, 'twould appear
By external swelling: but she looks like sleep,
As she would catch another Anthony
In her strong toil of Grace.

Here on her breast,
There is a vent of Blood, and something blown,
The like is on her Arm.

This is an Aspickes traile,
And these Figge-leaues have slime upon them, such
As the Aspicke leaves upon the Caves of Nyle.

Most probable
That so she dyed: for her Physician tells me
She has pursu'de Conclusions infinite
Of easy ways to dye. Take up her bed,
And bear her Women from the Monument,
She shall be buried by her Anthony.
No Grave upon the earth shall clip in it
A pair so famous: high events as these
Strike those that make them: and their Story is
No less in pity, then his Glory which
Brought them to be lamented. Our Army shall
In solemn show, attend this Funeral,
And then to Rome. Come Dolabella, see
High Order, in this great Solmemnity.


