AS I remember Adam, it was upon this fashion bequeathed me by will, but poor
a thousand Crowns, and as thou saift, charged my brother on his blessing to
breed me well: and there begins my sadness: My brother Jacques he keeps at
school, and report speaks goldenly of his profit: for my part, he keeps me
rustically at home, or (to speak more properly) stays me here at home unkept:
for call you that keeping for a gentleman of my birth, that differs not from
the stalling of an Ox? his horses are bred better, for besides that they are
fair with their feeding, they are taught their manage, and to that end Riders
dearly hired: but I (his brother) gain nothing under him but growth, for the
which his Animals on his dunghils are as much bound to him as I: besides this
nothing that he so plentifully gives me, the something that nature gave me,
his countenance seems to take from me: he lets me feed with his Hindes,
bars me the place of a brother, and as much as in him lies, mines my
gentility with my education. This is it Adam that grieves me, and the spirit of
my Father, which I think is within me, begins to mutiny against this
servitude. I will no longer endure it, though yet I know no wise remedy how to
avoid it


Yonder comes my Master, your brother.


Go apart Adam, and thou shall hear how he will shake me up.


Now Sir, what make you here?


Nothing: I am not taught to make any thing.


What mar you then sir?


Marry sir, I am helping you to mar that which God made, a poor unworthy
brother of yours with idleness


Marry sir be better employed, and be naught a while.


Shall I keep your hogs, and eat husks with them? what prodigal portion have
I spent, that I should come to such penury


Know you where you are sir?


O sir, very well: here in your Orchard.


Know you before whom sir?


I, better then him I am before knows me: I know you are my eldest brother,
and in the gentle condition of blood you should so know me: the courtesy of
nations allows you my better, in that you are the first borne, but the same
tradition takes not away my blood, were there twenty brothers betwixt us: I
have as much of my father in me, as you, albeit I confess your coming before
me is nearer to his reverence


What Boy.


Come, come elder brother, you are too young in this.


Will thou lay hands on me villain?


I am no villain: I am the youngest son of Sir Rowland de Boys, he was my
father, and he is thrice a villain that says such a father begot villains:
were thou not my brother, I would not take this hand from thy throat, till this
other had pulled out thy tongue for saying so, thou have raild on thy self


Sweet Masters be patient, for your Fathers remembrance, be at accord.


Let me go I say.


I will not till I please: you shall hear me: my father charged you in his
will to give me good education: you have trained me like a pezant, obscuring
and hiding from me all gentleman-like qualities: the spirit of my father grows
strong in me, and I will no longer endure it: therefore allow me such
exercises as may become a gentleman, or give me the poor allottery my father
left me by testament, with that I will go buy my fortunes


And what will thou do? beg when that is spent? Well sir, get you in. I will
not long be troubled with you: you shall have some part of your will, I pray
you leave me


I will no further offend you, then becomes me for my good.


Get you with him, you old dog.


Is old dog my reward: most true, I have lost my teeth in your service: God
be with my old master, he would not have spoke such a word. Ex. Orl. Ad


Is it even so, begin you to grow upon me? I will physic your ranckenesse,
and yet give no thousand crowns neither: holla Dennis


Calls your worship?


Was not Charles the Dukes Wrastler here to speak with me?


So please you, he is here at the door, and importunes access to you.


Call him in: 'twill be a good way: and to morrow the wrestling is.


Good morrow to your worship.


Good Mounsier Charles: what is the new news at the new Court?


There Is no news at the Court Sir, but the old news: that is, the old Duke
is banished by his younger brother the new Duke, and three or four loving Lords
have put themselves into voluntary exile with him, whose lands and revenues
enrich the new Duke, therefore he gives them good leave to wander


Can you tell if Rosalind the Dukes daughter be banished with her Father?


O no; for the Dukes daughter her Cosen so loves her, being ever from their
Cradles bred together, that he would have followed her exile, or have died to
stay behind her; she is at the Court, and no less beloved of her Uncle, then
his own daughter, and never two Ladies loved as they do


Where will the old Duke live?


They say he is already in the Forest of Arden, and a many merry men with
him; and there they live like the old Robin Hood of England: they say many young
Gentlemen flock to him every day, and fleet the time carelessly as they did in
the golden world


What, you wrestle to morrow before the new Duke.


Marry do I sir: and I came to acquaint you with a matter: I am given sir
secretly to understand, that your younger brother Orlando has a disposition to
come in disguised against me to try a fall: to morrow sir I wrestle for my
credit, and he that escapes me without some broken limb, shall acquit him
well: your brother is but young and tender, and for your love I would be loath
to foil him, as I must for my own honor if he come in: therefore out of my
love to you, I came hither to acquaint you withal, that either you might stay
him from his intendment, or brook such disgrace well as he shall run into,
in that it is a thing of his own search, and altogether against my will


Charles, I thank thee for thy love to me, which thou shall find I will most
kindly require: I had my self notice of my Brothers purpose herein, and have
by underhand means labored to dissuade him from it; but he is resolute. I Will
tell thee Charles, it is the stubbornest young fellow of France, full of
ambition, an envious emulator of every man's good parts, a secret and villainous
contriuer against me his natural brother: therefore use thy discretion, I had
as liese thou did break his neck as his finger. And thou were best look
to it; for if thou do him any slight disgrace, or if he do not mightily
grace himself on thee, he will practice against thee by poison, entrap thee
by some treacherous devise, and never leave thee till he has taken thy life by
some indirect means or other: for I assure thee, (and almost with tears I
speak it) there is not one so young, and so villainous this day living. I
speak but brotherly of him, but should I anathomize him to thee, as he is, I
must blush, and weep, and thou must look pale and wonder


I am heartily glad I came hither to you: if he come to morrow, I Will give him
his payment: if ever he go alone again, I Will never wrestle for prize more:
and so God keep your worship

Farewell good Charles. Now will I stir this Gamester: I hope I shall see an
end of him; for my soul (yet I know not why) hates nothing more then he: yet
he is gentle, never schooled, and yet learned, full of noble devise, of all
sorts enchantingly beloved, and indeed so much in the heart of the world, and
especially of my own people, who best know him, that I am altogether
misprised: but it shall not be so long, this wrastler shall clear all: nothing
remains, but that I kindle the boy thither, which now I Will go about


I pray thee Rosalind, sweet my Coz, be merry.


Dear Cellia; I show more mirth then I am mistress of, and would you yet were
merrier: unless you could teach me to forget a banished father, you must not
learn me how to remember any extraordinary pleasure


Herein I see thou love me not with the full weight that I love thee; if my
Uncle thy banished father had banished thy Uncle the Duke my Father, so thou
had been still with me, I could have taught my love to take thy father for
mine; so would thou, if the truth of thy love to me were so righteously
tempered, as mine is to thee


Well, I will forget the condition of my estate, to rejoice in yours.


You know my Father has no child, but I, nor none is like to have; and truly
when he dies, thou shall be his heir; for what he has taken away from thy
father perforce, I will render thee again in affection: by mine honor I will,
and when I break that oath, let me turn monster: therefore my sweet Rose, my
dear Rose, be merry


From henceforth I will Coz, and devise sports: let me see, what think you of
falling in Love


Marry I prithee do, to make sport withal: but love no man in good earnest,
nor no further in sport neither; then with safety of a pure blush, thou may
in honor come off again


What shall be our sport then?


Let us sit and mock the good houswife Fortune from her wheel, that her gifts
may henceforth be bestowed equally


I would we could do so: for her benefits are mightily misplaced, and the
bountiful blind woman does most mistake in her gifts to women


It Is true, for those that she makes fair, she scarce makes honest, and those
that she makes honest, she makes very ill fauouredly


Nay now thou go from Fortunes office to Natures: Fortune reigns in gifts
of the world, not in the lineaments of Nature


No; when Nature has made a fair creature, may she not by Fortune fall into
the fire? though nature has given us wit to flout at Fortune, has not Fortune
sent in this fool to cut off the argument


Indeed there is fortune too hard for nature, when fortune makes natures
natural, the cutter off of natures wit


Peradventure this is not Fortunes work neither, but Natures, who perceives
our natural wits too dull to reason of such goddesses, has sent this Natural
for our whetstone* for always the dullness of the fool, is the whetstone of
the wits. How now Wit, whether wander you


Mistress, you must come away to your father.


Were you made the messenger?


No by mine honor, but I was bid to come for you


Where learned you that oath fool?


Of a certain Knight, that swore by his Honor they were good Pan-cakes, and
swore by his Honor the Mustard was naught: Now I Will stand to it, the Pancakes
were naught, and the Mustard was good, and yet was not the Knight forsworn


How prove you that in the great heap of your knowledge?


I marry, now vnmuzzle your wisdom.


Stand you both forth now: stroke your chinnes, and swear by your beards that
I am a knave


By our beards (if we had them) thou art.


By my knauerie (if I had it) then I were: but if you swear by that that is
not, you are not forsworn: no more was this knight swearing by his Honor, for
he never had any; or if he had, he had sworn it away, before ever he saw
those Pancakes, or that Mustard


Prithee, who is it that thou means't?


One that old Frederick your Father loves.


My Fathers love is enough to honor him enough; speak no more of him, you will be
whipped for taxation one of these days


The more pity that fools may not speak wisely, what Wisemen do foolishly.


By my troth thou say true: For, since the little wit that fools have was
silenced, the little foolerie that wise men have makes a great show; Here
comes Monsieur the Beu


With his mouth full of news.


Which he will put on us, as Pigeons feed their young.


Then shall we be newes-cram'd.


All the better: we shall be the more Marketable. Boon-iour Monsieur le Beu,
what is the news


Fair Princess, you have lost much good sport.


Sport: of what color?


What color Madame? How shall I answer you?


As wit and fortune will.


Or as the destinies decrees.


Well said, that was laid on with a trowell.


Nay, if I keep not my rank.


Thou loosest thy old smell.


You amaze me Ladies: I would have told you of good wrestling, which you have
lost the sight of


Yet tell us the manner of the Wrestling.


I will tell you the beginning: and if it please your Ladyships, you may see the
end, for the best is yet to do, and here where you are, they are coming to
perform it


Well, the beginning that is dead and buried.


There comes an old man, and his three sons.


I could match this beginning with an old tale.


Three proper young men, of excellent growth and presence.


With bills on their necks: Be it known unto all men by these presents.


The eldest of the three, wrastled with Charles the Dukes Wrastler, which
Charles in a moment threw him, and broke three of his ribs, that there is
little hope of life in him: So he served the second, and so the third: yonder
they lie, the poor old man their Father, making such pitiful dole over them,
that all the beholders take his part with weeping


Alas.


But what is the sport Monsieur, that the Ladies have lost?


Why this that I speak of.


Thus men may grow wiser every day. It is the first time that ever I heard
breaking of ribs was sport for Ladies


Or I, I promise thee.


But is there any else longs to see this broken Music in his sides? Is there
yet another doates upon rib-breaking? Shall we see this wrestling Cousin


You must if you stay here, for here is the place appointed for the
wrestling, and they are ready to perform it


Yonder sure they are coming. Let us now stay and see it.


Come on, since the youth will not be entreated
His own peril on his forwardness.

Is yonder the man?


Even he, Madam.


Alas, he is too young: yet he looks successefully


How now daughter, and Cousin:
Are you crept hither to see the wrestling?

I my Liege, so please you give us leave.


You will take little delight in it, I can tell you there is such odds in the
man: In pity of the challengers youth, I would feign dissuade him, but he will
not be entreated. Speak to him Ladies, see if you can move him


Call him hither good Monsieuer Le Beu.


Do so: I Will not be by.


Monsieur the Challenger, the Princess calls for you.


I attend them with all respect and duty.


Young man, have you challenged Charles the Wrastler?


No fair Princess: he is the general challenger, I come but in as others do,
to try with him the strength of my youth


Young Gentleman, your spirits are too bold for your years: you have seen
cruel proof of this man's strength, if you saw your self with your eyes, or
knew your self with your judgment, the fear of your adventure would counsel
you to a more equal enterprise. We pray you for your own sake to embrace your
own safety, and give over this attempt


Do young Sir, your reputation shall not therefore be misprised: we will make it
our suite to the Duke, that the wrestling might not go forward


I beseech you, punish me not with your hard thoughts, wherein I confess me
much guilty to deny so fair and excellent Ladies any thing. But let your
fair eyes, and gentle wishes go with me to my trial; wherein if I be
foiled, there is but one shamed that was never gracious: if killed, but one
dead that is willing to be so: I shall do my friends no wrong, for I have none
to lament me: the world no injury, for in it I have nothing: only in the
world I fill up a place, which may be better supplied, when I have made it
empty


The little strength that I have, I would it were with you.


And mine to eeke out hers.


Fare you well: pray heaven I be deceived in you.


Your hearts desires be with you.


Come, where is this young gallant, that is so desirous to lie with his mother
earth


Ready Sir, but his will has in it a more modest working.


You shall try but one fall.


No, I warrant your Grace you shall not entreat him to a second, that have so
mightily persuaded him from a first


You mean to mock me after: you should not have mocked me before: but come
your ways


Now Hercules, be thy speed young man.


I would I were invisible, to catch the strong fellow by the leg.


Oh excellent young man.


If I had a thunderbolt in mine eye, I can tell who should down.


No more, no more.


Yes I beseech your Grace, I am not yet well breathed.


How do thou Charles?


He cannot speak my Lord.


Bear him away:
What is thy name young man?

Orlando my Liege, the youngest son of Sir Roland de Boys.


I would thou had been son to some man else,
The world esteemed thy father honorable,
But I did find him still mine enemy:
Thou should have better pleased me with this deed,
Had thou descended from another house:
But fare thee well, thou art a gallant youth,
I would thou had told me of another Father.

Were I my Father (Coze) would I do this?


I am more proud to be Sir Rolands son,
His youngest son, and would not change that calling
To be adopted heir to Fredricke.

My Father loved Sir Roland as his soul,
And all the world was of my Fathers mind,
Had I before known this young man his son,
I should have given him tears unto entreaties,
Ere he should thus have ventured.

Gentle Cosen,
Let us go thank him, and encourage him:
My Fathers rough and envious disposition
Sticks me at heart: Sir, you have well deserved,
If you do keep your promises in love;
But justly as you have exceeded all promise,
Your Mistress shall be happy.

Gentleman,
Wear this for me: one out of suites with fortune
That could give more, but that her hand lacks means.
Shall we go Coze?

I: fare you well fair Gentleman.


Can I not say, I thank you? My better parts
Are all thrown down, and that which here stands up
Is but a quintine, a mere liuelesse block.

He calls us back: my pride fell with my fortunes,
I Will ask him what he would: Did you call Sir?
Sir, you have wrastled well, and overthrown
More then your enemies.

Will you go Coze?


Have with you: fare you well.


What passion hangs these waights upon my tongue?
I cannot speak to her, yet she urged conference.
O poor Orlando! thou art overthrown
Or Charles, or something weaker masters thee.

Good Sir, I do in friendship counsel you
Te leave this place; Albeit you have deserved
High commendation, true applause, and love;
Yet such is now the Dukes condition,
That he misconsters all that you have done:
The Duke is humorous, what he is indeed
More suites you to conceive, then I to speak of.

I thank you Sir; and pray you tell me this,
Which of the two was daughter of the Duke,
That here was at the Wrestling?

Neither his daughter, if we judge by manners,
But yet indeed the taller is his daughter,
The other is daughter to the banished Duke,
And here detained by her usurping Uncle
To keep his daughter company, whose loves
Are deerer then the natural bond of Sisters:
But I can tell you, that of late this Duke
Has taken displeasure against his gentle Niece,
Grounded upon no other argument,
But that the people praise her for her virtues,
And pity her, for her good Fathers sake;
And on my life his malice against the Lady
Will suddenly break forth: Sir, fare you well,
Hereafter in a better world then this,
I shall desire more love and knowledge of you.

I rest much bounden to you: fare you well.
Thus must I from the smoke into the smother,
From tyrant Duke, unto a tyrant Brother.
But heavenly Rosaline.

Why Cosen, why Rosaline: Cupid have mercy,
Not a word?

Not one to throw at a dog.


No, thy words are too precious to be cast away upon curs, throw some of them
at me; come lame me with reasons


Then there were two Cosens laid up, when the one should be lamed with reasons,
and the other mad without any


But is all this for your Father?


No, some of it is for my childs Father: Oh how full of briers is this working
day world


They are but burs, Cosen, thrown upon thee in holiday foolerie, if we walk
not in the trodden paths our very petty-coates will catch them


I could shake them off my coat, these burs are in my heart.


Hem them away.


I would try if I could cry hem, and have him.


Come, come, wrestle with thy affections.


O they take the part of a better wrastler then my self.


O, a good wish upon you: you will try in time in dispight of a fall: but
turning these jests out of service, let us talk in good earnest: Is it
possible on such a sudden, you should fall into so strong a liking with old
Sir Roulands youngest son


The Duke my Father loved his Father dearly.


Does it therefore ensue that you should love his Son dearly? By this kind
of chase, I should hate him, for my father hated his father dearly; yet I hate
not Orlando


No faith, hate him not for my sake.


Why should I not? does he not deserve well?


Let me love him for that, and do you love him
Because I do. Look, here comes the Duke.

With his eyes full of anger.


Mistress, dispatch you with your safest haste,
And get you from our Court.

Me Uncle.


You Cosen,
Within these ten days if that thou be found
So near our public Court as twenty miles,
Thou die sor it.

I do beseech your Grace
Let me the knowledge of my fault bear with me:
If with my self I hold intelligence,
Or have acquaintance with mine own desires,
If that I do not dream, or be not frantic,
(As I do trust I am not) then dear Uncle,
Never so much as in a thought unborn,
Did I offend your highness.

Thus do all Traitors,
If their purgation did consist in words,
They are as innocent as grace it self;
Let it suffice thee that I trust thee not.

Yet your mistrust cannot make me a Traitor;
Tell me whereon the likelihoods depends?

Thou art thy Fathers daughter, there is enough.


So was I when your highness took his Dukdome,
So was I when your highness banished him;
Treason is not inherited my Lord,
Or if we did derive it from our friends,
What Is that to me, my Father was no Traitor,
Then good my Liege, mistake me not so much,
To think my poverty is treacherous.

Dear Sovereign hear me speak.


I Celia, we staid her for your sake,
Else had she with her Father ranged along.

I did not then entreat to have her stay.
It was your pleasure, and your own remorse,
I was too young that time to value her,
But now I know her: if she be a Traitor,
Why so am I: we still have slept together,
Rose at an instant, learned, played, eat together,
And wheresoere we went, like Iunos Swans,
Still we went coupled and inseparable.

She is too subtle for thee, and her smoothnes;
Her very silence, and per patience,
Speak to the people, and they pity her:
Thou art a fool, she robs thee of thy name,
And thou will show more bright, and seem more virtuous
When she is gone: then open not thy lips
Firm, and irreuocable is my doombe,
Which I have past upon her, she is banished.

Pronounce that sentence then on me my Liege,
I cannot live out of her company.

You are a fool: you Neice provide your self,
If you out-stay the time, upon mine honor,
And in the greatness of my word you die.

O my poor Rosaline, whether will thou go?
Will thou change Fathers? I will give thee mine:
I charge thee be not thou more grieved then I am.

I have more cause.


Thou have not Cosen,
Prithee be cheerful; know thou not the Duke
Has banished me his daughter?

That he has not.


No, has not? Rosaline lacks then the love
Which teaches thee that thou and I am one,
Shall we be sundred? shall we part sweet girl?
No, let my Father seek another heir:
Therefore devise with me how we may fly
Whether to go, and what to bear with us,
And do not seek to take your change upon you,
To bear your griefs your self, and leave me out:
For by this heaven, now at our sorrows pale;
Say what thou can, I Will go along with thee.

Why, whether shall we go?


To seek my Uncle in the Forest of Arden.


Alas, what danger will it be to us,
(Maids as we are) to travel forth so far?
Beauty provoke thieves sooner then gold.

I Will put my self in poor and mean attire,
And with a kind of vmber smirch my face,
The like do you, so shall we pass along,
And never stir assailants.

Were it not better,
Because that I am more then common tall,
That I did suite me all points like a man,
A gallant curtelax upon my thigh,
A bore-speare in my hand, and in my heart
Lie there what hidden woman's fear there will,
We Will have a swashing and a marshall outside,
As many other mannish cowards have,
That do outface it with their semblances.

What shall I call thee when thou art a man?


I Will have no worse a name then Jove's own Page,
And therefore look you call me Ganimed.
But what will you by called?

Something that has a reference to my state:
No longer Celia, but Aliena.

But Cosen, what if we assaid to steal
The clownish Fool out of your Fathers Court:
Would he not be a comfort to our travail?

Heel go along ore the wide world with me,
Leave me alone to woe him; Let Us away
And get our Jewels and our wealth together,
Devise the fittest time, and safest way
To hide us from pursuit that will be made
After my flight: now go in we content
To liberty, and not to banishment.

Now my Coe-mates, and brothers in exile:
Has not old custom made this life more sweet
Then that of painted pomp? Are not these woods
More free from peril then the envious Court?
Here feel we not the penalty of Adam,
The seasons difference, as the I cie phange
And churlish chiding of the winters wind,
Which when it bites and blows upon my body
Even till I shrink with cold, I smile, and say
This is no flattery: these are counselors
That feelingly persuade me what I am:
Sweet are the uses of adversity
Which like the toad, ougly and venomous,
Wears yet a precious Jewel in his head:
And this our life exempt from public haunt,
Finds tongues in trees, books in the running brooks,
Sermons in stones, and good in every thing.

I would not change it, happy is your Grace
That can translate the stubbornness of fortune
Into so quiet and so sweet a style.

Come, shall we go and kill us venison?
And yet it irkes me the poor dapled fools
Being native Burgers of this desert City,
Should in their own confines with forked heads
Have their round banches goard.

Indeed my Lord
The melancholy Jacques grieves at that,
And in that kind swears you do more usurp
Then does your brother that has banished you:
To day my Lord of Amiens, and my self,
Did steal behind him as he lay along
Under an oak, whose anticke root peepes out
Upon the brook that brawles along this wood,
To the which place a poor sequestered Stag
That from the Hunters aim had taken a hurt,
Did come to languish; and indeed my Lord
The wretched annimall heau'd forth such groans
That their discharge did stretch his leatherne coat
Almost to bursting, and the big round tears
Cours'd one another down his innocent nose
In pitteous chase: and thus the hairie fool,
Much marked of the melancholy Jacques,
Stood on the extremest verge of the swift brook,
Augmenting it with tears.

But what said Jacques?
Did he not moralize this spectacle?

O yes, into a thousand similies.
First, for his weeping into the needless stream;
Poor Dear quoth he, thou make a testament
As worldlings do, giving thy sum of more
To that which had too must: then being there alone,
Left and abandoned of his velvet friend;
It Is right quoth he, thus misery does part
The Flux of company: anon a careless Heard
Full of the pasture, iumps along by him
And never stai^ to greet him: I quoth Jacques,
Sweep on you fat and greazie Citizens,
It Is just the fashion; wherefore do you look
Upon that poor and broken bankrupt there?
Thus most inuectiuely he pierces through
The body of Country, City, Court,
Yea, and of this our life, swearing that we
Are mere usurpers, tyrants, and what is worse
To fright the Annimals, and to kill them up
In their assigned and native dwelling place.

And did you leave him in this contemplation?


We did my Lord, weeping and commenting
Upon the sobbing Dear.

Show me the place,
I love to cope him in these sullen fits,
For then he is full of matter.

I Will bring you to him strait.


Can it be possible that no man saw them?
It cannot be, some villains of my Court
Are of consent and sufferance in this.

I cannot hear of any that did see her,
The Ladies her attendants of her chamber
Saw her a bed, and in the morning early,
They found the bed vntreasur'd of their Mistress.

My Lord, the roynish Clown, at whom so often,
Your Grace was wont to laugh is also missing,
Hisperia the Princess Gentlewoman
Confesses that she secretly ore-heard
Your daughter and her Cosen much commend
The parts and graces of the Wrastler
That did but lately foil the synowie Charles,
And she believes where ever they are gone
That youth is surely in their company.

Send to his brother, fetch that gallant hither,
If he be absent, bring his Brother to me,
I Will make him find him: do this suddenly;
And let not search and inquisition quail,
To bring again these foolish runawaies.

Who Is there?


What my young Master, oh my gentle master,
Oh my sweet master, O you memory
Of old Sir Rowland; why, what make you here?
Why are you virtuous? Why do people love you?
And wherefore are you gentle, strong, and valiant?
Why would you be so fond to overcome
The bonnie priser of the humorous Duke?
Your praise is come too swiftly home before you.
Know you not Master, to seem kind of men,
Their graces serve them but as enemies,
No more do yours: your virtues gentle Master
Are sanctified and holy traitors to you:
Oh what a world is this, when what is comely
Enuenoms him that bears it?
Why, what is the matter?

O unhappy youth,
Come not within these doors: within this roof
The enemy of all your graces lives
Your brother, no, no brother, yet the son
(Yet not the son, I will not call him son)
Of him I was about to call his Father,
Has heard your praises, and this night he means,
To burn the lodging where you use to lie,
And you within it: if he fail of that
He will have other means to cut you off;
I ouerheard him: and his practices:
This is no place, this house is but a butcherie;
Abhor it, fear it, do not enter it.

Why whether Adam would thou have me go?


No matter whether, so you come not here.


What, would thou have me go and beg my food,
Or with a base and boistrous Sword enforce
A theeuish living on the common rode?
This I must do, or know not what to do:
Yet this I will not do, do how I can,
I rather will subject me to the malice
Of a diuerted blood, and bloody brother.

But do not so: I have five hundred Crowns,
The thriftie hire I saved under your Father,
Which I did store to be my foster Nurse,
When service should in my old limbs lie lame,
And unregarded age in corners thrown,
Take that, and he that does the Ravens feed,
Yea prouidently caters for the Sparrow,
Be comfort to my age: here is the gold,
All this I give you, let me be your servant,
Though I look old, yet I am strong and lusty;
For in my youth I never did apply
Hot, and rebellious liquors in my blood,
Nor did not with vnbashfull forehead woe,
The means of weakness and debilitie,
Therefore my age is as a lusty winter,
Frostie, but kindly; let me go with you,
I Will do the service of a younger man
In all your business and necessities.

Oh good old man, how well in thee appears
The constant service of the antique world,
When service sweat for duty, not for meede:
Thou art not for the fashion of these times,
Where none will sweat, but for promotion,
And having that do choke their service up,
Even with the having, it is not so with thee:
But poor old man, thou prun'st a rotten tree,
That cannot so much as a blossom yield,
In lieu of all thy pains and husbandry,
But come thy ways, we will go along together,
And ere we have thy youthful wages spent,
We Will light upon some settled low content.

Master go on, and I will follow thee
To the last gasp with truth and loyalty,
From seauentie years, till now almost fourscore
Here lived I, but now live here no more
At seauenteene years, many their fortunes seek
But at fourscore, it is too late a week,
Yet fortune cannot recompense me better
Then to die well, and not my Masters debtor.

O Jupiter, how merry are my spirits?


I care not for my spirits, if my legs were not weary.


I could find in my heart to disgrace my man's apparel, and to cry like a
woman: but I must comfort the weaker vessel, as doublet and hose ought to show
it self coragious to petty-coate; therefore courage, good Aliena


I pray you bear with me, I cannot go no further.


For my part, I had rather bear with you, then bear you: yet I should bear
no cross if I did bear you, for I think you have no money in your purse


Well, this is the Forest of Arden.


I, now am I in Arden, the more fool I, when I was at home I was in a better
place, but Travelers must be content


I, be so good Touchstone: Look you, who comes here, a young man and an old in
solemn talk


That is the way to make her scorn you still.


Oh Corin, that thou knew'st how I do love her.


I partly guess: for I have loved ere now.


No Corin, being old, thou can not guess,
Though in thy youth thou wast as true a lover
As ever sighed upon a midnight pillow:
But if thy love were ever like to mine,
As sure I think did never man love so:
How many actions most ridiculous,
Have thou been drawn to by thy fantasy?

Into a thousand that I have forgotten.


Oh thou did then never love so heartily,
If thou remembrest not the slightest folly,
That ever love did make thee run into,
Thou have not loved.
Or if thou have not sat as I do now,
Wearing thy hearer in thy Mistress praise,
Thou have not loved.
Or if thou have not broke from company,
Abruptly as my passion now makes me,
Thou have not loved.
O Phebe, Phebe, Phebe.

Alas poor Shepherd searching of they would,
I have by hard adventure found mine own.

And I mine: I remember when I was in love, I broke my sword upon a stone, and
bid him take that for coming a night to Jane Smile, and I remember the kissing
of her batler, and the Cowes dugs that her pretty chopped hands had milk'd; and
I remember the wooing of a peascod instead of her, from whom I took two cods,
and giving her them again, said with weeping tears, wear these for my sake:
we that are true Lovers, run into strange capers; but as all is mortal in
nature, so is all nature in love, mortal in folly


Thou speak wiser then thou art ware of.


Nay, I shall nere be ware of mine own wit, till
I break my shins against it.

Jove, Jove, this Shepherds passion,
Is much upon my fashion.

And mine, but it grows something stale with me.


I pray you, one of you question yon'd man,
If he for gold will give us any food,
I faint almost to death.

Holla; you Clown.


Peace fool, he is not thy kinsman.


Who calls?


Your betters Sir.


Else are they very wretched.


Peace I say; good even to your friend.


And to you gentle Sir, and to you all.


I prithee Shepherd, if that love or gold
Can in this desert place buy entertainment,
Bring us where we may rest our selves, and feed:
Here Is a young maid with travail much oppressed,
And faints for succor.

Fair Sir, I pity her,
And wish for her sake more then for mine own,
My fortunes were more able to relieve her;
But I am shepherd to another man,
And do not sheere the Fleeces that I graze:
My master is of churlish disposition,
And little wreakes to find the way to heaven
By doing deeds of hospitality.
Besides his Coat, his Flocks, and bounds of feed
Are now on sale, and at our sheep-coat now
By reason of his absence there is nothing
That you will feed on: but what is, come see,
And in my voice most welcome shall you be.

What is he that shall buy his flock and pasture?


That young Swain that you saw here but erewhile,
That little cares for buying any thing.

I pray thee, if it stand with honesty,
Buy thou the Cottage, pasture, and the flock,
And thou shall have to pay for it of us.

And we will mend thy wages:
I like this place, and willingly could
Waste my time in it.

Assuredly the thing is to be sold:
Go with me, if you like upon report,
The soil, the profit, and this kind of life,
I will your very faithful Feeder be,
And buy it with your Gold right suddenly.

Under the green wood tree, who loves to lie with me,
And turn his merry Note, unto the sweet Birds throat:
Come hither, come hither, come hither:
Here shall he see no enemy,
But Winter and rough Weather.

More, more, I prithee more.


It will make you melancholy Monsieur Jacques


I thank it: More, I prithee more,
I can suck melancholy out of a song,
As a Weazel suckes eggs: More, I prithee more.

My voice is ragged, I know I cannot please you.


I do not desire you to please me,
I do desire you to sing:
Come, more, another stanzo: Call you 'em stanzo's?

What you will Monsieur Jacques.


Nay, I care not for their names, they owe me nothing. Will you sing?


More at your request, then to please my self.


Well then, if ever I thank any man, I Will thank you: but that they call
complement is like the encounter of two dog-Apes. And when a man thanks me
heartily, me thinks I have given him a penie, and he renders me the beggarly
thanks. Come sing; and you that will not hold your tongues


Well, I Will end the song. Sirs, cover the while, the Duke will drink under this
tree; he has bin all this day to look you


And I have bin all this day to avoid him:
He is too disputeable for my company:
I think of as many matters as he, but I give
Heaven thanks, and make no boast of them.
Come, warble, come.


Seeking the food he eats, and pleased with what he gets:
Come hither, come hither, come hither,
Here shall he see. etc.

I Will give you a verse to this note,
That I made yesterday in despite of my Invention.

And I Will sing it.


Thus it goes.
If it do come to pass, that any man turn Ass:
Leaving his wealth and ease,
A stubborn will to please,
Ducdame, ducdame, ducdame:
Here shall he see, gross fools as he,
And if he will come to me.

What Is that Ducdame?


It Is a Greek invocation, to call fools into a circle. I Will go sleep if I can:
if I cannot, I Will rail against all the first borne of Egypt


And I Will go seek the Duke,
His banquet is prepared.

Dear Master, I can go no further:
O I die for food. Here lie I down,
And measure out my grave. Farwell kind master.

Why how now Adam? No greater heart in thee:
Live a little, comfort a little, cheer thy self a little.
If this uncouth Forest yield any thing savage,
I will either be food for it, or bring it for food to thee:
Thy conceit is nearer death, then thy powers.
For my sake be comfortable, hold death a while
At the arms end: I will here be with thee presently,
And if I bring thee not something to eat,
I will give thee leave to die: but if thou die
Before I come, thou art a mocker of my labor.
Well said, thou look cheerely,
And I Will be with thee quickly: yet thou lie
In the bleake air. Come, I will bear thee
To some, shelter, and thou shall not die
For lack of a dinner,
If there live any thing in this Desert.
Cheerely good Adam.

I think he be transformed into a beast,
For I can no where find him, like a man.

My Lord, he is but even now gone hence,
Here was he merry, hearing of a Song.

If he compact of iarres, grow Musical,
We shall have shortly discord in the Spheres:
Go seek him, tell him I would speak with him.

He saues my labor by his own approach.


Why how now Monsieur, what a life is this
That your poor friends must woe your company,
What, you look merrily.

A Fool, a fool: I met a fool in th Forest,
A motley Fool (a miserable world:)
As I do live by food, I met a fool,
Who laid him down, and bask'd him in the Sun,
And railed on Lady Fortune in good terms,
In good set terms, and yet a motley fool.
Good morrow fool (quoth I:) no Sir, quoth he,
Call me not fool, till heaven has sent me fortune,
And then he drew a dial from his poake,
And looking on it, with lacke-lustre eye,
Says, very wisely, it is ten a clock:
Thus we may see (quoth he) how the world wagges:
It Is but an hour ago, since it was nine,
And after one hour more, 'twill be eleven,
And so from hour to hour, we ripe, and ripe,
And then from hour to hour, we rot, and rot,
And thereby hangs a tale. When I did hear
The motley Fool, thus moral on the time,
My Lungs began to crow like Chanticleere,
That Fools should be so deep contemplative:
And I did laugh, sans intermission
An hour by his dial. Oh noble fool,
A worthy fool: Motley's the only wear.

What fool is this?


O worthy Fool: One that has bin a Courtier
And says, if Ladies be but young, and fair,
They have the gift to know it: and in his braiue,
Which is as dry as the remainder biscuit
After a voyage: He has strange places crammed
With observation, the which he vents
In mangled forms. O that I were a fool,
I am ambitious for a motley coat.

Thou shall have one.


It is my only suite,
Provided that you weed your better judgments
Of all opinion that grows rank in them,
That I am wise. I must have liberty
Wiithall, as large a Charter as the wind,
To blow on whom I please, for so fools have:
And they that are most gauled with my folly,
They most must laugh: And why sir must they so?
The why is plain, as way to Parish Church:
He, that a Fool does very wisely hit,
Does very foolishly, although he smart
Seem senseless of the bob. If not,
The Wise-mans folly is anathomiz'd
Even by the squandring glances of the fool.
Inuest me in my motley: Give me leave
To speak my mind, and I will through and through
Cleanse the foul body of the infected world,
If they will patiently receive my medicine.

Fie on thee. I can tell what thou would do.


What, for a Counter, would I do, but good?


Most mischeeuous foul sin, in chiding sin:
For thou thy self have been a Libertine,
As sensual as the brutish sting it self,
And all the imbossed sores, and headed evils,
That thou with license of free foot have caught,
Would thou disgorge into the general world.

Why who cries out on pride,
That can therein tax any private party:
Does it not flow as hugely as the Sea,
Till that the weary very means do ebb.
What woman in the City do I name,
When that I say the City woman bears
The cost of Princes on unworthy shoulders?
Who can come in, and say that I mean her,
When such a one as she, such is her neighbor?
Or what is he of basest function,
That says his bravery is not on my cost,
Thinking that I mean him, but therein suites
His folly to the mettle of my speech,
There then, how then, what then, let me see wherein
My tongue has wronged him: if it do him right,
Then he has wronged himself: if he be free,
why then my taxing like a wild-goose flies
Vnclaim'd of any* man But who come here?

Forbear, and eat no more.


Why I have eat none yet.


Nor shall not, till necessity be served.


Of what kind should this Cock come of?


Art thou thus bolden'd man by thy distres?
Or else a rude despiser of good manners,
That in ciuility thou seem so empty?

You touched my vein at first, the thorny point
Of bare distress, has taken from me the show
Of smooth ciuility: yet am I inland bred,
And know some nourture: But forbear, I say,
He dies that touches any of this fruit,
Till I, and my affairs are answered.

And you will not be answered with reason,
I must dye.

What would you have?
Your gentleness shall force, more then your force
Move us to gentleness.

I almost die for food, and let me have it.


Sit down and feed, and welcome to our table


Speak you so gently? Pardon me I pray you,
I thought that all things had bin savage here,
And therefore put I on the countenance
Of stern command'ment. But what ere you are
That in this desert inaccessible,
Under the shade of melancholy boughs,
Loose, and neglect the creeping hours of time:
If ever you have looked on better days:
If ever been where bells have knoll'd to Church:
If ever sat at any good man's feast:
If ever from your eyelids wiped a tear,
And know what it is to pity, and be pitied:
Let gentleness my strong enforcement be,
In the which hope, I blush, and hide my Sword.

True is it, that we have seen better days,
And have with holy bell bin knowld to Church,
And sat at good men's feasts, and wiped our eyes
Of drops, that sacred pity has engendered:
And therefore sit you down in gentleness,
And take upon command, what help we have
That to your wanting may be ministered.

Then but forbear your food a little while:
Whiles (like a Do) I go to find my Fawn,
And give it food. There is an old poor man,
Who after me, has many a weary step
Limpt in pure love: till he be first sufficed,
Oppressed with two weak evils, age, and hunger,
I will not touch a bit.

Go find him out.
And we will nothing waste till you return.

I thank ye, and be blessed for your good comfort.


Thou see, we are not all alone unhappy:
This wide and universal Theater
Presents more woeful Pageants then the Scene
Wherein we play in.

All the world's a stage,
And all the men and women, merely Players;
They have their Exits and their Entrances,
And one man in his time plays many parts,
His Acts being seven ages. At first the Infant,
Mewling, and puking in the Nurses arms:
Then, the whining Schoole-boy with his Satchell
And shining morning face, creeping like snaile
Unwillingly to school. And then the Lover,
Sighing like Furnace, with a woeful ballad
Made to his Mistress eye-brow. Then, a Soldier,
Full of strange oaths, and bearded like the Pard,
Ielous in honor, sudden, and quick in quarrel,
Seeking the bubble Reputation
Even in the Canons mouth: And then, the Justice,
In fair round belly, with good Capon lined,
With eyes severe, and beard of formal cut,
Full of wise sawes, and modern instances,
And so he plays his part. The sixth age shifts
Into the lean and slipper'd Pantaloone,
With spectacles on nose, and pouch on side,
His youthful hose well saved, a world too wide,
For his shrunk shanke, and his big manly voice,
Turning again toward childish trebble pipes,
And whistles in his sound. Last Scene of all,
That ends this strange euentfull history,
Is second childishness, and mere oblivion,
Sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste, sans every thing.

Welcome: set down your venerable burden, and let him feed.


I thank you most for him.


So had you need,
I scarce can speak to thank you for my self.

Welcome, fall too: I will not trouble you,
As yet to question you about your fortunes:
Give us some Music, and good Cozen, sing.

Blow, blow, thou winter wind^,
Thou art not so unkind, as man's ingratitude
Thy tooth is not so keen, because thou art not seen, although thy breath be
rude
Heigh ho, sing heigh ho, unto the green holly,
Most friendship, is fayning; most Loving, mere folly:
The heigh ho, the holly,
This Life is most jolly.
Freize, freize, thou bitter sky that do not bight so nigh as benefitts
forgot
Though thou the waters warpe, thy sting is not so sharp, as friend remembered
not
Heigh ho, sing, etc.

If that you were the good Sir Rowlands son,
As you have whispered faithfully you were,
And as mine eye does his effigies witness,
Most truly limn'd, and living in your face,
Be truly welcome hither: I am the Duke
That loved your Father, the residue of your fortune,
Go to my Cave, and tell me, Good old man,
Thou art right welcome, as thy masters is:
Support him by the arm: give me your hand,
And let me all your fortunes understand.

Not see him since? Sir, sir, that cannot be:
But were I not the better part made mercy,
I should not seek an absent argument
Of my revenge, thou present: but look to it,
Find out thy brother wheresoere he is,
Seek him with Candle: bring him dead, or living
Within this tweluemonth, or turn thou no more
To seek a living in our Territory.
Thy Lands and all things that thou do call thine,
Worth seizure, do we seize into our hands,
Till thou can quit thee by thy brothers mouth,
Of what we think against thee.

Oh that your Highness knew my heart in this:
I never loved my brother in my life.

More villain thou. Well push him out of doors
And let my officers of such a nature
Make an extent upon his house and Lands:
Do this expediently, and turn him going.

Hang there my verse, in witness of my love,
And thou thrice crowned Queen of night survey
With thy chaste eye, from thy pale sphere above
Thy Huntresse name, that my full life does sway.
O Rosalind, these Trees shall be my Books,
And in their barks my thoughts I Will charracter,
That every eye, which in this Forest looks,
Shall see thy virtue witnest every where.
Run, run Orlando, carue on every Tree,
The fair, the chaste, and vnexpressiue she.

And how like you this shepherds life Mr Touchstone?


Truly Shepherd, in respect of it self, it is a good life; but in respect
that it is a shepherds life, it is naught. In respect that it is solitary, I
like it very well: but in respect that it is private, it is a very vild life.
Now in respect it is in the fields, it pleases me well: but in respect it is
not in the Court, it is tedious. As it is a spare life (look you) it fits my
humor well: but as there is no more plenty in it, it goes much against my
stomach. Has't any Philosophy in thee shepherd


No more, but that I know the more one sickens, the worse at ease he is: and
that he that wants money, means, and content, is without three good friends.
That the property of rain is to wet, and fire to burn: That pood pasture
makes fat sheep: and that a great cause of the night, is lack of the Sun:
That he that has learned no wit by Nature, nor Art, may complain of good
breeding, or comes of a very dull kindred


Such a one is a natural Philosopher:
Was It ever in Court, Shepherd?

No truly.


Then thou art damned.


Nay, I hope.


Truly thou art damned, like an ill roasted Egg, all on one side.


For not being at Court? your reason.


Why, if thou never was it at Court, thou never saw good manners: if thou
never saw good manners, then thy manners must be wicked, and wickedness is
sin, and sin is damnation: Thou art in a parlous state shepherd


Not a whit Touchstone, those that are good manners at the Court, are as
ridiculous in the Country, as the behavior of the Country is most mockeable
at the Court. You told me, you salute not at the Court, but you kiss your
hands; that courtesy would be vncleanlie if Courtiers were shepherds


Instance, briefly: come, instance.


Why we are still handling our Ewes, and their
Fels you know are greasy.

Why do not your Courtiers hands sweat? and is not the grease of a Mutton, as
wholesome as the sweat of a man? Shallow, shallow: A better instance I say:
Come


Besides, our hands are hard.


Your lips will feel them the sooner. Shallow again: a more sounder instance,
come


And they are often tarr'd over, with the surgery of our sheep: and would you
have us kiss Tar? The Courtiers hands are perfumed with Ciuet


Most shallow man: Thou worms meat in respect of a good piece of flesh
indeed: learn of the wise and perpend: Ciuet is of a baser birth then Tar,
the very uncleanly flux of a Cat. Mend the instance Shepherd


You have too Courtly a wit for me, I Will rest.


Will thou rest damned? God help thee shallow man: God make incision in thee,
thou art raw


Sir, I am a true Labourer, I earne that I eat: get that I wear; owe no man
hate, envy no man's happiness: glad of other men's good content with my harm:
and the greatest of my pride, is to see my Ewes graze, and my Lambs suck


That is another simple sin in you, to bring the Ewes and the Rams
together, and to offer to get your living, by the copulation of Cattle, to be
baw'd to a Belweather, and to betray a shee-Lambe of a tweluemonth to a
crooked-pated old Cuckoldly Ram, out of all reasonable match. If thou be
not damned for this, the devil himself will have no shepherds, I cannot see
else how thou should escape


Here comes young Mr Ganimed, my new Mistrisses Brother.


From the east to western Jude,
no jewel is like Rosalinde,
Her worth being mounted on the wind,
through all the world bears Rosalinde.
All the pictures fairest Linde,
are but black to Rosalinde:
Let no face be kept in mind,
but the fair of Rosalinde.

I Will rhyme you so, eight years together; dinners, and suppers, and sleeping
hours excepted: it is the right Butter-womens rank to Market


Out Fool.


For a taste.

If a Heart do lack a Hind,
Let him seek out Rosalinde:
If the Cat will after kind,
so be sure will Rosalinde:
Wintred garments must be linde,
so must slender Rosalinde:
They that reap must sheafe and bind,
then to cart with Rosalinde.
Sweetest nut, bath sowrest rind,
such a nut is Rosalinde.
He that sweetest rose will find,
must find Loves prick, and Rosalinde.
This is the very false gallop of Verses, why do you infect your self with
them


Peace you dull folle, I found them on a tree.


Truly the tree yields bad fruit.


I Will graffe it with you, and then I shall graffe it with a Medler: then it will
be the earliest fruit in th country: for you will be rotten ere you be half
ripe, and that is the right virtue of the Medler


You have said: but whether wisely or no, let the Forest judge.


Peace, here comes my sister reading, stand a side.


Why should this Desert be, for it is unpeopled? Noe:
Tongues I Will hang on every tree, that shall civil sayings shoe.
Some, how brief the Life of man runs his erring pilgrimage,
That the stretching of a span, buckles in his sum of age.
Some of violated vows, twixt the souls of friend, and friend:
But upon the fairest bows, or at every sentence end;
Will I Rosalinda write, teaching all that read, to know
The quintessence of every sprite, heaven would in little show.
Therefore heaven Nature charged, that one body should be filled
With all Graces wide enlarged, nature presently distilled
Helens cheek, but not his heart,
Cleopatra's Majesty:
Attalanta's better part,
sad Lucrecia's Modesty.
Thus Rosalinde of many parts,
by Heavenly Synod was devised,
Of many faces, eyes, and hearts,
to have the touches dearest pris'd.
Heaven would that she these gifts should have,
and I to live and die her slave.

O most gentle Jupiter, what tedious homily of Love have you wearied your
parishioners withal, and never cri'de, have patience good people


How now back friends: Shepherd, go off a little: go with him sirrah.


Come Shepherd, let us make an honorable retreit, though not with bag and
baggage, yet with scrip and scrippage


Did thou hear these verses?


O yes, I heard them all, and more too, for some of them had in them more feet
then the Verses would bear


That Is no matter: the feet might bear ye verses.


I, but the feet were lame, and could not bear themselves without the verse,
and therefore stood lamely in the verse


But did thou hear without wondering, how thy name should be hanged and
carved upon these trees


I was seven of the nine days out of the wonder, before you came: for look
here what I found on a Palm tree; I was never so berim d since Pythagoras
time that I was an Irish Rat, which I can hardly remember


Tro you, who has done this?


Is it a man?


And a chain that you once wore about his neck: change you color?


I, prithee who?


O Lord, Lord, it is a hard matter for friends to meet; but Mountains may be
remoou'd with Earthquakes, and so encounter


Nay, but who is it?


Is it possible?


Nay, I prithee now, with most petitionary vehemence, tell me who it is.


O wonderful, wonderful, and most wonderful wonderful, and yet again
wonderful, and after that out of all hooping


Good my complexion, do thou think though I am caparison'd like a man, I
have a doublet and hose in my disposition? One inch of delay more, is a
South Sea of discovery. I prithee tell me, who is it quickly, and speak
apace: I would thou could stammer, that thou might power this concealed
man out of thy mouth, as Wine comes out of a narrow-mouthed bottle: either too
much at once, or none at all. I prithee take the Cork out of thy mouth, that
I may drink thy tidings


So you may put a man in your belly.


Is he of Gods making? What manner of man?
Is his head worth a hat? Or his chin worth a beard?

Nay, he has but a little beard.


Why God will send more, if the man will be thankful: let me stay the growth
of his beard, if thou delay me not the knowledge of his chin


It is young Orlando, that tript up the Wrastlers heels, and your heart, both
in an instant


Nay, but the devil take mocking: speak sad brow, and true maid.


IN faith (Coz) it is he.


Orlando?


Orlando.


Alas the day, what shall I do with my doublet and hose? What did he when thou
saw him? What said he? How looked he? Wherein went he? What makes he
here? Did he ask for me? Where remains he? How parted he with thee? And when
shall thou see him again? Answer me in one word


You must borrow me Gargantuas mouth first: it is a Word too great for any mouth
of this Ages size, to say I and no, to these particulars, is more then to
answer in a Catechism


But does he know that I am in this Forest, and in man's apparel? Looks he as
freshly, as he did the day he Wrastled


It is as easy to count Atomies as to resolve the propositions of a Lover: but
take a taste of my finding him, and relish it with good observance. I found
him under a tree like a dropped Acorne


It may well be called Jove's tree, when it drops forth fruit.


Give me audience, good Madam.


Proceed.


There lay he stretched along like a Wounded knight.


Though it be pity to see such a sight, it well becomes the ground.


Cry holla, to the tongue, I prithee: it curuettes unseasonably. He was
furnished like a Hunter


O ominous, he comes to kill my Heart.


I would sing my song without a burden, thou bring'st me out of tune.


Do you not know I am a woman, when I think,
I must speak: sweet, say on.

You bring me out. Soft, comes he not here?


It Is he, slinke by, and note him.


I thank you for your company, but good faith
I had as liefe have been my self alone.

And so had I: but yet for fashion sake
I thank you too, for your society.

God buy you, let us meet as little as we can.


I do desire we may be better strangers.


I pray you mar no more trees with Writing Loue-songs in their barks.


I pray you mar no more of my verses with reading them ill-fauouredly.


Rosalinde is your loves name?


Yes, Just.


I do not like her name.


There was no thought of pleasing you when she was christened.


What stature is she of?


Just as high as my heart.


You are full of pretty answers: have you not bin acquainted with goldsmiths
wives, and cond the^ out of ring


Not so: but I answer you right painted cloth, from whence you have studied
your questions


You have a nimble wit; I think 'twas made of Attalanta's heels. Will you
sit down with me, and we two, will rail against our Mistress the world, and
all our misery


I will chide no breather in the world but my self against whom I know most
faults


The worst fault you have, is to be in love.


It Is a fault I will not change, for your best virtue: I am weary of you.


By my troth, I was seeking for a Fool, when I found you.


He is drowned in the brook, look but in, and you shall see him.


There I shall see mine own figure.


Which I take to be either a fool, or a Cipher.


I Will tarry no longer with you, farewell good signior Love.


I am glad of your departure: Adieu good Monsieur Melancholy.


I will speak to him like a saucy Lacky* and under that habit play the knave
with him, do you hear Forrester


Very well, what would you?


I pray you, what is it a clock?


You should ask me what time of day: there is no clock in the Forest.


Then there is no true Lover in the Forest, else sighing every minute and
groaning every hour would detect the lazy foot of time, as well as a clock


And why not the swift foot of time? Had not that bin as proper?


By no means sir; Time travels in diverse paces, with diverse persons: I Will tell
you who Time ambles withal, who Time trots withal, who Time gallops withal,
and who he stands still withal


I prithee, who does he trot withal?


Marry he trots hard with a young maid, between the contract of her marriage,
and the day it is solemnizd: if the interim be but a sennight, Times pace is so
hard, that it seems the length of seven year


Who ambles Time withal?


With a Priest that lacks Latin, and a rich man that has not the Gowt: for
the one sleeps easily because he cannot study, and the other lives merrily,
because he feels no pain: the one lacking the burden of lean and wasteful
Learning; the other knowing no burden of heavy tedious penury. These Time
ambles withal


Who does he gallop withal?


With a thief to the gallows: for though he go as softly as foot can fall,
he thinks himself too soon there


Who stays it still withal?


With Lawiers in the vacation: for they sleep between Term and Term, and
then they perceive not how time moves


Where dwell you pretty youth?


With this Shepherdess my sister: here in the skirts of the Forest, like
fringe upon a petticoat


Are you native of this place?


As the Conie that you see dwell where she is kindled.


Your accent is something finer, then you could purchase in so removed a
dwelling


I have bin told so of many: but indeed, an old religious Uncle of mine
taught me to speak, who was in his youth an inland man, one that knew
Courtship too well: for there he fell in love. I have heard him read many
Lectors against it, and I thank God, I am not a Woman to be touched with so
many giddie offenses as he has generally taxed their whole sex withal


Can you remember any of the principal evils, that he laid to the charge of
women


There were none principal, they were all like one another, as half pence are,
every one fault seeming monstrous, til his fellow-fault came to match it


I prithee recount some of them.


No: I will not cast away my physic, but on those that are sick. There is a
man haunts the Forest, that abuses our young plants with caruing Rosalinde on
their barks; hangs Oades upon Hauthornes, and Elegies on brambles; all
(forsooth) defying the name of Rosalinde. If I could meet that Fancie-monger, I
would give him some good counsel, for he seems to have the Quotidian of Love
upon him


I am he that is so Loue-shak'd, I pray you tell me your remedy.


There is none of my Uncles marks upon you: he taught me how to know a man in
love: in which cage of rushes, I am sure you act not prisoner


What were his marks?


A lean cheek, which you have not: a blew eye and sunken, which you have not:
an unquestionable spirit, which you have not: a beard neglected, which you have
not: (but I pardon you for that, for simply your having in beard, is a younger
brothers reuennew) then your hose should be vngarter'd, your bonnet vnbanded,
your sleeue vnbutton'd, your shoo vnti'de, and every thing about you,
demonstrating a careless desolation: but you are no such man; you are rather
point device in your accoustrements, as loving your self, then seeming the
Lover of any other


Fair youth, I would I could make thee believe I Love.


Me believe it? You may as soon make her that you Love believe it, which I
warrant she is apter to do, then to confess she do'^: that is one of the
points, in the which women still give the lie to their consciences. But in good
sooth, are you he that hangs the verses on the Trees, wherein Rosalind is so
admired


I swear to thee youth, by the white hand of Rosalind, I am that he, that
unfortunate he


But are you so much in love, as your rimes speak?


Neither rhyme nor reason can express how much.


Love is merely a madness, and I tell you, deserves as well a dark house, and
a whip, as madmen do: and the reason why they are not so punished and cured, is
that the Lunacie is so ordinary, that the whippers are in love too: yet I
profess curing it by counsel


Did you ever cure any so?


Yes one, and in this manner. He was to imagine me his Love, his Mistress: and
I set him every day to woe me. At which time would I, being but a moonish
youth, grieve, be effeminate, changeable, longing, and liking, proud,
fantastical, apish, shallow, inconstant, full of tears, full of smiles; for
every passion something, and for no passion truly any thing, as boys and
women are for the most part, cattle of this color: would now like him, now
loath him: then entertain him, then forswear him: now weep for him, then spit
at him; that I drove my Suitor from his mad humor of love, to a living humor of
madness, wc was to forswear the full stream of ye world, and to live in a nooke
merely Monastic: and thus I cured him, and this way will I take upon me to
wash your Liver as clean as a sound sheep heart, that there shall not be one
spot of Love in it


I would not be cured, youth.


I would cure you, if you would but call me Rosalind, and come every day to my
Coat, and woe me


Now by the faith of my love, I will; Tell me where it is.


Go with me to it, and I Will show it you: and by the way, you shall tell me, where
in the Forest you live: Will you go


With all my heart, good youth.


Nay, you must call me Rosalind: Come sister, will you go?


Come apace good Audrey, I will fetch up your
Goats, Audrey: and how Audrey am I the man yet?
Does my simple feature content you?

Your features, Lord warrant us: what features?


I am here with thee, and thy Goats, as the most capricious Poet honest Ovid
was among the Goths


O knowledge ill inhabited, worse then love in a thatched house.


When a man's verses cannot be understood, nor a man's good wit seconded with the
forward child, understanding: it strikes a man more dead then a great
reckoning in a little room: truly, I would the Gods had made thee poetical


I do not know what Poetical is: is it honest in deed and word: is it a true
thing


No truly: for the truest poetry is the most faining, and Lovers are given to
Poetry: and what they swear in Poetry, may be said as Lovers, they do feign


Do you wish then that the Gods had made me Poetical?


I do truly: for thou swear'st to me thou art honest: Now if thou were a Poet,
I might have some hope thou did feign


Would you not have me honest?


No truly, unless thou were hard favored: for honesty coupled to beauty, is
to have Honey a sauce to Sugar


A material fool.


Well, I am not fair, and therefore I pray the Gods make me honest.


Truly, and to cast away honesty upon a foul slut, were to put good meat
into an unclean dish


I am not a slut, though I thank the Gods I am foul.


Well, praised be the Gods, for thy foulness; sluttishnesse may come
hereafter. But be it, as it may be, I will marry thee: and to that end, I
have bin with Sir Oliver Mar-text, the Vicar of the next village, who has
promised to meet me in this place of the Forest, and to couple us


I would feign see this meeting.


Well, the Gods give us joy.


Amen. A man may if he were of a fearful heart, stagger in this attempt: for
here we have no Temple but the wood, no assembly but horne-beasts. But what
though? Courage. As horns are odious, they are necessary. It is said, many a
man knows no end of his goods; right: Many a man has good Horns, and knows no
end of them. Well* that is the dowry of his wife, it is none of his own
getting; horns, even so poor men alone: No, no, the noblest Dear has them
as huge as the Rascal: Is the single man therefore blessed? No, as a walled
Town is more worthier then a village, so is the forehead of a married man,
more honorable then the bare brow of a Batcheller: and by how much defense is
better then no skill, by so much is a horn more precious then to want

Here comes Sir Oliver: Sir Oliver Mar-text you are well met. Will you dispatch
us here under this tree, or shall we go with you to your Chapel


Is there none here to give the woman?


I will not take her on gift of any man.


Truly she must be given, or the marriage is not lawful.


Proceed, proceed: I Will give her.


Good even good Mr what ye cal't: how do you Sir, you are very well met:
goddild you for your last company, I am very glad to see you, even a toy in
hand here Sir: Nay, pray be covered


Will you be married, Motley?


As the Ox has his bow sir, the horse his curb, and the Falcon her bells, so
man has his desires, and as Pigeons bill, so wedlock would be nibling


And will you (being a man of your breeding) be married under a bush like a
beggar? Get you to church, and have a good Priest that can tell you what
marriage is, this fellow will but join you together, as they join Wainscot,
then one of you will prove a shrunk pannell, and like green timber, warpe,
warpe


I am not in the mind, but I were better to be married of him then of
another, for he is not like to marry me well: and not being well married, it will
be a good excuse for me hereafter, to leave my wife


Go thou with me,
And let me counsel thee.

Come sweet Audrey,
We must be married, or we must live in baudrey:

Farewell good Mr Oliver: Not O sweet Oliver, O brave Oliver leave me not behind
thee: But wind away, be gone I say, I will not to wedding with thee


It Is no matter; Never a fantastical knave of them all shall slout me out of my
calling


Never talk to me, I will weep.


Do I prithee, but yet have the grace to consider, that tears do not become a
man


But have I not cause to weep?


As good cause as one would desire,
Therefore weep.

His very hair
Is of the dissembling color.

Something browner then Iudasses:
Marry his kisses are Iudasses own children.

IN faith his hair is of a good color.


An excellent color:
Your Chessenut was ever the only color:

And his kissing is as full of sanctity,
As the touch of holy bread.

He has bought a pair of cast lips of Diana: a Nun of winters sisterhood
kisses not more religiously, the very ye of chastity is in them


But why did he swear he would come this morning, and comes not?


Nay certainly there is no truth in him.


Do you think so?


Yes, I think he is not a pick purse, nor a horse-stealer, but for his verity
in love, I do think him as concaue as a covered goblet, or a Worme-eaten nut


Not true in love?


Yes, when he is in, but I think he is not in.


You have heard him swear downright he was.


Was, is not is: besides, the oath of Lover is no stronger then the word of a
Tapster, they are both the confirmer of false reckonings, he attends here in
the forest on the Duke your father


I met the Duke yesterday, and had much question with him: he asked me of what
parentage I was; I told him of as good as he, so he laughed and let me go.
But what talk we of Fathers, when there is such a man as Orlando


O that is a brave man, he writes brave verses, speaks brave words, swears
brave oaths, and breaks them bravely, quite trauers athwart the heart of his
lover, as a puisny Tilter, yt spurs his horse but on one side, breaks his
staff like a noble goose; but all is brave that youth mounts, and folly guides:
who comes here


Mistress and Master, you have often enquired
After the Shepherd that complained of love,
Who you saw sitting by me on the Turph,
Praising the proud disdainful Shepherdess
That was his Mistress.

Well: and what of him?


If you will see a pageant truly played
Between the pale complexion of true Love,
And the red glowe of scorn and proud disdain,
Go hence a little, and I shall conduct you
If you will mark it.

O come, let us remove,
The sight of Lovers feeds those in love:
Bring us to this sight, and you shall say
I Will prove a busy actor in their play.

Sweet Phebe do not scorn me, do not Phebe
Say that you love me not, but say not so
In bitterness; the common executioner
Whose heart the accustomed sight of death makes hard
Falls not the axe upon the humbled neck,
But first begs pardon: will you sterner be
Then he that dies and lives by bloody drops?

I would not be thy executioner,
I fly thee, for I would not iniure thee:
Thou tellst me there is murder in mine eye,
It Is pretty sure, and very probable,
That eyes that are the frailst, and softest things,
Who shut their coward gates on atomyes,
Should be called tyrants, butchers, murderers.
Now I do frown on thee with all my heart,
And if mine eyes can wound, now let them kill thee:
Now counterfeit to swound* why now fall down,
Or if thou can not, oh for shame, for shame,
Lie not, to say mine eyes are murderers:
Now show the wound mine eye has made in thee,
Scratch thee but with a pin, and there remains
Some scarre of it: Lean upon a rush
The Cicatrice and capable impressure
Thy palm some moment keeps: but now mine eyes
Which I have darted at thee, hurt thee not,
Nor I am sure there is no force in eyes
That can do hurt.

O dear Phebe,
If ever (as that ever may be near)
You meet in some fresh cheek the power of fancy,
Then shall you know the wounds invisible
That Loves keen arrows make.

But till that time
Come not thou near me: and when that time comes,
Afflict me with thy mockes, pity me not,
As till that time I shall not pity thee.

And why I pray you? who might be your mother
That you insult, exult, and all at once
Over the wretched? what though you hau no beauty
As by my faith, I see no more in you
Then without Candle may go dark to bed:
Must you be therefore proud and pitiless?
Why what means this? why do you look on me?
I see no more in you then in the ordinary
Of Natures sale-worke? 'ods my little life,
I think she means to tangle my eyes too:
No faith proud Mistress, hope not after it,
It Is not your inkie brows, your black silk hair,
Your bugle eye balls, nor your cheek of cream
That can entame my spirits to your worship:
You foolish Shepherd, wherefore do you follow her
Like foggy South, puffing with wind and rain,
You are a thousand times a properer man
Then she a woman. It Is such fools as you
That makes the world full of ill-fauourd children:
It Is not her glass, but you that flatters her,
And out of you she sees her self more proper
Then any of her lineaments can show her:
But Mistress, know your self down on your knees
And thank heaven, fasting, for a good man's love;
For I must tell you friendly in your ear,
Sell when you can, you are not for all markets:
Cry the man mercy, love him, take his offer,
Foul is most foul, being foul to be a scoffer.
So take her to thee Shepherd, fare you well.

Sweet youth, I pray you chide a year together,
I had rather here you chide, then this man woo.

Hee^ fallen in love with your foulness, and she will
Fall in love with my anger. If it be so, as fast
As she answers thee with frowning looks, i will sauce
Her with bitter words: why look you so upon me?

For no ill will I bear you.


I pray you do not fall in love with me,
For I am falser then vows made in wine:
Besides, I like you not: if you will know my house,
It Is at the tufft of Olives, here hard by:
Will you go Sister? Shepherd ply her hard:
Come Sister: Shepherdess, look on him better
And be not proud, though all the world could see,
None could be so abused in sight as he.
Come, to our flock.

Dead Shepherd, now I sind thy saw of might,
Who ever loved, that loved not at first sight?

Sweet Phebe.


Hah: what say thou Siluius?


Sweet Phebe pity me.


Why I am sorry for thee gentle Siluius.


Where ever sorrow is, relief would be:
If you do sorrow at my grief in love,
By giving love your sorrow, and my grief
Were both extermin'd.

Thou have my love, is not that neighbourly?


I would have you.


Why that were covetousness:
Siluius; the time was, that I hated thee;
And yet it is not, that I bear thee love,
But since that thou can talk of love so well,
Thy company, which erst was irksome to me
I will endure; and I Will employ thee too:
But do not look for further recompense
Then thine own gladness, that thou art employed.

So holy, and so perfect is my love,
And I in such a poverty of grace,
That I shall think it a most plenteous crop
To gleane the broken ears after the man
That the maine harvest reapes: loose now and then
A scattred smile, and that I Will live upon.

Know thou the youth that spoke to me yere-while?


Not very well, but I have met him often,
And he has bought the Cottage and the bounds
That the old Carlot once was Master of.

Think not I love him, though I ask for him,
It Is but a peevish boy, yet he talks well,
But what care I for words? yet words do well
When he that speaks them pleases those that hear:
It is a pretty youth, not very pretty,
But sure he is proud, and yet his pride becomes him;
He Will make a proper man: the best thing in him
Is his complexion: and faster then his tongue
Did make offense, his eye did heal it up:
He is not very tall, yet for his years he is tall:
His leg is but so so, and yet it is well:
There was a pretty redness in his lip,
A little riper, and more lusty red
Then that mixed in his cheek: 'twas just the difference
Betwixt the constant red, and mingled Damask.
There be some women Siluius, had they marked him
In parcells as I did, would have gone near
To fall in love with him: but for my part
I love him not, nor hate him not: and yet
Have more cause to hate him then to love him,
For what had he to do to chide at me?
He said mine eyes were black, and my hair black,
And now I am remembered, scorned at me:
I marvel why I answered not again,
But that is all one: omittance is no quittance:
I Will write to him a very tanting Letter,
And thou shall bear it, will thou Siluius?

Phebe, with all my heart.


I Will write it strait:
The matter's in my head, and in my heart,
I will be bitter with him, and passing short;
Go with me Siluius.

I prithee, pretty youth, let me better acquainted with thee.


They say you are a melancholy fellow.


I am so: I do love it better then laughing.


Those that are in extremity of either, are abominable fellows, and betray
themselves to every modern censure, worse then drunkards


Why, it is good to be sad and say nothing.


Why then it is good to be a post.


I have neither the Scholars melancholy, which is emulation: nor the
Musicians, which is fantastical; nor the Courtiers, which is proud: nor the
Soldiers, which is ambitious: nor the Lawiers, which is politic: nor the
Ladies, which is nice: nor the Lovers, which is all these: but it is a
melancholy of mine own, compounded of many simples, extracted from many
objects, and indeed the sundry contemplation of my trauells, in which by often
rumination, wraps me in a most humorous sadness


A Traveler: by my faith you have great reason to be sad: I fear you have
sold your own Lands, to see other men's; then to have seen much, and to have
nothing, is to have rich eyes and poor hands


Yes, I have gained my experience.


And your experience makes you sad: I had rather have a fool to make me
merry, then experience to make me sad, and to travail for it too


Good day, and happiness, dear Rosalind.


Nay then God buy you, and you talk in blanke verse.


Farewell Mounsieur Trauellor: look you lispe, and wear strange suites;
disable all the benefits of your own Country: be out of love with your
nativity, and almost chide God for making you that countenance you are; or I
will scarce think you have swam in a Gundello. Why how now Orlando, where have
you bin all this while? you a lover? and you serve me such another trick,
never come in my sight more


My fair Rosalind, I come within an hour of my promise.


Break an hours promise in love? he that will divide a minute into a
thousand parts, and break but a part of the thousand part of a minute in the
affairs of love, it may be said of him that Cupid has clapped him oth' shoulder,
but I Will warrant him heart hole


Pardon me dear Rosalind.


Nay, and you be so tardie, come no more in my sight, I had as liefe be wooed
of a Snaile


Of a Snaile?


I, of a Snaile: for though he comes slowly, he carries his house on his head;
a better ioyncture I think then you make a woman: besides, he brings his
destiny with him


What Is that?


Why horns: wr such as you are feign to be beholding to your wives for: but he
comes armed in his fortune, and preuents the slander of his wife


Virtue is no horne-maker: and my Rosalind is virtuous.


And I am your Rosalind.


It pleases him to call you so: but he has a Rosalind of a better leere then
you


Come, woo me, woo me: for now I am in a holy day humor, and like enough to
consent: What would you say to me now, and I were your very, very Rosalind


I would kiss before I spoke.


Nay, you were better speak first, and when you were grauel'd, for lack of
matter, you might take occasion to kiss: very good Orators when they are out,
they will spit, and for lovers, lacking (God warn us) matter, the cleanliest
shift is to kiss


How if the kiss be denide?


Then she puts you to entreatie, and there begins new matter.


Who could be out, being before his beloved Mistress?


Marry that should you if I were your Mistress, or I should think my honesty
ranker then my wit


What, of my suite?


Not out of your apparel, and yet out of your suite:
Am not I your Rosalind?

I take some joy to say you are, because I would be talking of her.


Well, in her person, I say I will not have you.


Then in mine own person, I die.


No faith, die by Attorney: the poor world is almost six thousand years old,
and in all this time there was not any man died in his own person (videlicet)
in a love cause: Trotlous had his brains dashed out with a Grecian club, yet
he did what he could to die before, and he is one of the patterns of love.
Leander, he would have lived many a fair year though Hero had turned Nun; if
it had not bin for a hot Midsomer-night, for (good youth) he went but forth to
wash him in the Hellespont, and being taken with the crampe, was droun'd, and
the foolish Chronoclers of that age, found it was Hero of Cestos. But these are
all lies, men have died from time to time, and worms have eaten them, but not
for love


I would not have my right Rosalind of this mind, for I protest her frown
might kill me


By this hand, it will not kill a fly: but come, now I will be your Rosalind
in a more comming-on disposition: and ask me what you will, I will grant it


Then love me Rosalind.


Yes faith will I, fridaies and saterdaies, and all.


And will thou have me?


I, and twenty such.


What say thou?


Are you not good?


I hope so.


Why then, can one desire too much of a good thing: Come sister, you shall be
the Priest, and marry us: give me your hand Orlando: What do you say sister


Pray thee marry us.


I cannot say the words.


You must begin, will you Orlando.


Go too: will you Orlando, have to wife this Rosalind?


I will.


I, but when?


Why now, as fast as she can marry us.


Then you must say, I take thee Rosalind for wife.


I take thee Rosalind for wife.


I might ask you for your Commission, But I do take thee Orlando for my
husband: there is a girl goes before the Priest, and certainly a Woman's
thought runs before her actions


So do all thoughts, they are winged.


Now tell me how long you would have her, after you have possessed her?


For ever, and a day.


Say a day, without the ever: no, no Orlando, men are April when they woe,
December when they wed: Maids are May when they are maids, but the sky
changes when they are wives: I will be more jealous of thee, then a Barbary
cocke-pidgeon over his hen, more clamorous then a Parrat against rain, more
newfangled then an ape, more giddy in my desires, then a monkey: I will weep
for nothing, like Diana in the Fountain, and I will do that when you are
disposed to be merry: I will laugh like a Hyen, and that when thou art inclined
to sleep


But will my Rosalind do so?


By my life, she will do as I do.


O but she is wise.


Or else she could not have the wit to do this: the wiser, the waywarder:
make the doors upon a woman's wit, and it will out at the casement: shut that,
and 'twill out at the keyhole: stop that, 'twill fly with the smoke out at
the chimney


A man that had a wife with such a wit, he might say, wit whether will it?


Nay, you might keep that check for it, till you met your wives wit going to
your neighbors bed


And what wit could wit have, to excuse that?


Marry to say, she came to seek you there: you shall never take her without
her answer, unless you take her without her tongue: o that woman that cannot
make her fault her husbands occasion, let her never nurse her child her self,
for she will breed it like a fool


For these two hours Rosalinde, I will leave thee.


Alas, dear love, I cannot lack thee two hours.


I must attend the Duke at dinner, by two a clock I will be with thee again.


I, go your ways, go your ways: I knew what you would prove, my friends
told me as much, and I thought no less: that flattering tongue of yours won
me: it is but one cast away: and so come death: two o'clocke is your hour


I, sweet Rosalind.


By my troth, and in good earnest, and so God mend me, and by all pretty
oaths that are not dangerous, if you break one jot of your, promise, or come
one minute behind your hour, I will think you the most patheticall
breake-promise, and the most hollow lover, and the most unworthy of her you
call Rosalinde, that may be chosen out of the gross band of the unfaithful:
therefore beware my censure, and keep your promise


With no less religion, then if thou were indeed my Rosalind: so adieu.


Well, Time is the old Justice that examines all such offenders, and let time
try: adieu


You have simply misused our sex in your loue-prate: we must have your doublet
and hose plucked over your head, and show the world what the bird has done to
her own neast


O coz, coz, coz: my pretty little coz, that thou did know how many fathom
deep I am in love: but it cannot be sounded: my affection has an unknown
bottom, like the Bay of Portugal


Or rather bottomless, that as fast as you pour affection in, in runs out.


No, that same wicked Bastard of Venus, that was begot of thought, conceived of
spleen, and borne of madness, that blind rascally boy, that abuses every
ones eyes, because his own are out, let him be judge, how deep I am in love:
i will tell thee Aliena, I cannot be out of the sight of Orlando: I Will go find a
shadow, and sigh till he come


And I Will sleep.


Which is he that killed the Dear?


Sir, it was I.


Let Us present him to the Duke like a Roman Conqueror, and it would do well
to set the Deares horns upon his head, for a branch of victory; have you no
song Forrester for this purpose


Yes Sir.


Sing it: it is no matter how it be in tune, so it make noise enough.


What shall he have that killed the Dear?
His Leather skin, and bornes to wear:
Then sing him home, the rest shall bear this burden;
Take thou no scorn to wear the horn,
It was a crest ere thou wast borne,
Thy fathers father wore it,
And thy father bore it,
The horn, the horn, the lusty horn,
Is not a thing to laugh to scorn.

How say you now, is it not past two a clock?
And here much Orlando.

I warrant you, with pure love, and troubled brain,
He has t'ane his bow and arrows, and is gone forth
To sleep: look who comes here.

My errand is to you, fair youth,
My gentle Phebe, did bid me give you this:
I know not the contents, but as I guess
By the stern brow, and waspish action
Which she did use, as she was writing of it,
It bears an angry tenure; pardon me,
I am but as a guiltless messenger.

Patience her self would startle at this letter,
And play the swaggerer, bear this, bear all:
She says I am not fair, that I lack manners,
She calls me proud, and that she could not love me
Were man as rare as Phoenix: 'od's my will,
Her love is not the Hare that I do hunt,
Why writes she so to me? well Shepherd, well,
This is a Letter of your own device.

No, I protest, I know not the contents,
Phebe did write it.

Come, come, you are a fool,
And turned into the extremity of love.
I saw her hand, she has a leatherne hand,
A freestone colored hand: I verily did think
That her old gloves were on, but it was her hands:
She has a huswiues hand, but that is no matter:
I say she never did invent this letter,
This is a man's invention, and his hand.

Sure it is hers.


Why, it is a boisterous and a cruel style,
A style for challengers: why, she defies me,
Like Turk to Christian: vvomens gentle brain
Could not drop forth such giant rude invention,
Such Ethiop words, blacker in their effect
Then in their countenance: will you hear the letter?

So please you, for I never heard it yet:
Yet heard too much of Phebes cruelty.

She Phebes me: mark how the tyrant writes.
Read. Art thou god, to Shepherd turned?
That a maidens heart has burned.
Can a woman rail thus?

Call you this railing?


Read. Why, thy godhead laid a part,
War'st thou with a woman's heart?
Did you ever hear such railing?
Whiles the eye of man did woo me,
That could do no vengeance to me.
Meaning me a beast.
If the scorn of your bright cine
Have power to raise such love in mine,
Alack, in me, what strange effect
Would they work in mild aspect?
Whiles you chid me, I did love,
How then might your prayers move?
He that brings this love to thee,
Little knows this Love in me*
And by him seal up thy mind,
Whether that thy youth and kind
Will the faithful offer take
Of me, and all that I can make,
Or else by him my love deny,
And then I Will study how to die.

Call you this chiding?


Alas poor Shepherd.


Do you pity him? No, he deserves no pity: will thou love such a woman? what
to make thee an instrument, and play false strains upon thee? not to be
endured. Well, go your way to her; (for I see Love has made thee a tame
snake) and say this to her; That if she love me, I charge her to love thee: if
she will not, I will never have her, unless thou entreat for her: if you be a
true lover hence, and not a word; for here comes more company


Good morrow, fair ones: pray you, (if you know)
Where in the Purlews of this Forest, stands
A sheep-coat, fenced about with Oliue-trees.

West of this place, down in the neighbor bottom
The rank of Oziers, by the murmuring stream
Left on your right hand, brings you to the place:
But at this hour, the house does keep it self,
There Is none within.

If that an eye may profit by a tongue,
Then should I know you by description,
Such garments, and such years: the boy is fair,
Of femall favor, and bestows himself
Like a ripe sister: the woman low
And browner then her brother: are not you
The owner of the house I did enquire for?

It is no boast, being asked, to say we are.


Orlando does commend him to you both,
And to that youth he calls his Rosalind,
He sends this bloody napkin; are you he?

I am: what must we understand by this?


Some of my shame, if you will know of me
What man I am, and how, and why, and where
This handkercher was stained.

I pray you tell it.


When last the young Orlando parted from you,
He left a promise to return again
Within an hour, and pacing through the Forest,
Chewing the food of sweet and bitter fancy,
Lo what befell: he threw his eye aside,
And mark what object did present it self
Under an old Oak, whose bows were moss'd with age
And high top, bald with dry antiquity:
A wretched ragged man, ore-gowne with hair
Lay sleeping on his back; about his neck
A green and gilded snake had wreathed it self,
Who with her head, nimble in threats approached
The opening of his mouth: but suddenly
Seeing Orlando, it vnlink'd it self,
And with indented glides, did slip away
Into a bush, under which bushes shade
A Lyonnesse, with vdders all drawn dry,
Lay cowching head on ground, with catlike watch
When that the sleeping man should stir; for it is
The royal disposition of that beast
To prey on nothing, that does seem as dead:
This seen, Orlando did approach the man,
And found it was his brother, his elder brother.

O I have heard him speak of that same brother,
And he did render him the most unnatural
That lived amongst men.

And well he might so do,
For well I know he was unnatural.

But to Orlando: did he leave him there
Food to the sucked and hungry Lyonnesse?

Twice did he turn his back, and purposed so:
But kindness, nobler ever then revenge,
And Nature stronger then his just occasion,
Made him give battle to the Lyonnesse:
Who quickly fell before him, in which hurtling
From miserable slumber I awaked.

Are you his brother?


Was It you he rescued?


Was It you that did so often contriue to kill him?


'Twas I: but it is not I: I do not shame
To tell you what I was, since my conversion
So sweeetly tastes, being the thing I am.

But for the bloody napkin?


By and by:
When from the first to last betwixt us two,
Tears our recountments had most kindly bathed,
As how I came into that Desert place.
I brief, he led me to the gentle Duke,
Who gave me fresh array, and entertainment,
Committing me unto my brothers love,
Who led me instantly unto his Cave,
There stripped himself, and here upon his arm
The Lyonnesse had torn some flesh away,
Which all this while had bled; and now he fainted,
And cride in fainting upon Rosalinde.
Brief, I recouer'd him, bound up his wound,
And after some small space, being strong at heart,
He sent me hither, stranger as I am
To tell this story, that you might excuse
His broken promise, and to give this napkin
Died in this blood, unto the Shepherd youth,
That he in sport does call his Rosalind.

Why how now Ganimed, sweet Ganimed.


Many will swoon when they do look on blood.


There is more in it; Cosen Ganimed.


Look, he recouers.


I would I were at home.


We Will lead you thither:
I pray you will you take him, by the arm.

Be of good cheer youth: you a man?
You lack a man's heart.

I do so, I confess it:

Ah, sir, a body would think this was well counterfeited, I pray you tell
your brother how well I counterfeited: heigh-ho


This was not counterfeit, there is too great testimony in your complexion,
that it was a passion of earnest


Counterfeit, I assure you.


Well then, take a good heart, and counterfeit to be a man.


So I do: but in faith, I should have been a woman by right.


Come, you look paler and paler: pray you draw homewards: good sir, go with
us


That will I: for I must bear answer back
How you excuse my brother, Rosalind.

I shall devise: something: but I pray you commend my counterfeiting to him:
will you go


We shall find a time Awdrie, patience gentle Awdrie.


Faith the Priest was good enough, for all the old gentleman's saying.


A most wicked Sir Oliver, Awdrie, a most vile Mar-text. But Awdrie, there is a
youth here in the Forest lays claim to you


I, I know who it is: he has no interest in me in the world: here comes the
man you mean


It is meat and drink to me to see a Clown, by my troth, we that have good
wits, have much to answer for: we shall be flouting: we cannot hold


Good even Audrey.


God ye good even William.


And good even to you Sir.


Good even gentle friend. Cover thy head, cover thy head: Nay prithee be
eouer'd. How old are you Friend


Five and twenty Sir.


A ripe age: Is thy name William?


William, sir.


A fair name. Was It borne in th Forest here?


I sir, I thank God.


Thank God: A good answer:
Art rich?

'Faith sir, so, so.


So, so, is good, very good, very excellent good:
and yet it is not, it is but so, so:
Art thou wise?

I sir, I have a pretty wit.


Why, thou say well. I do now remember a saying: The Fool does think he is
wise, but the wiseman knows himself to be a Fool. The Heathen Philosopher,
when he had a desire to eat a Grape, would open his lips when he put it into
his mouth, meaning thereby, that Grapes were made to eat, and lips to open.
You do love this maid


I do sit.


Give me your hand: Art thou Learned?


No sir.


Then learn this of me, To have, is to have. For it is a figure in Rhetoric,
that drink being powered out of a cup into a glass, by filling the one, does
empty the other. For all your Writers do consent, that ipse is he: now you are
not ipse, for I am he


Which he sir?


He sir, that must marry this woman: Therefore you Clown, abandon: which is
in the vulgar, leave the society: which in the boorish, is company, of this
female: which in the common, is woman: which together, is, abandon the society
of this Female, or Clown thou perishest: or to thy better understanding,
dyest; or (to wit) I kill thee, make thee away, translate thy life into death,
thy liberty into bondage: I will deal in poison with thee, or in bastinado,
or in steel: I will bandy with thee in faction, I will ore-run thee with
police: I will kill thee a hundred and fifty ways, therefore tremble and
depart


Do good William.


God rest you merry sir.


Our Master and Mistress seeks you: come away, away.


Trip Audry, trip Audry, I attend, I attend.


Is It possible, that on so little acquaintance you should like her? that, but
seeing, you should love her? And loving woo? and wooing, she should grant? And
will you persevere to enjoy her


Neither call the giddiness of it in question; the poverty of her, the small
acquaintance, my sudden woing, nor sudden consenting: but say with me, I
love Aliena: say with her, that she loves me; consent with both, that we may
enjoy each other: it shall be to your good: for my fathers house, and all the
reuennew, that was old Sir Rowlands will I estate upon you, and here live and
die a Shepherd


You have my consent.
Let your Wedding be to morrow: thither will I
Inuit the Duke, and all is contented followers:
Go you, and prepare Aliena; for look you,
Here comes my Rosalinde.

God save you brother.


And you fair sister.


Oh my dear Orlando, how it greeues me to see thee wear thy heart in a scarf.


It is my arm.


I thought thy heart had been wounded with the claws of a Lion.


Wounded it is, but with the eyes of a Lady.


Did your brother tell you how I counterfeyted to sound, when he showed me your
handkercher


I, and greater wonders then that.


O, I know where you are: nay, it is true: there was never any thing so sudden,
but the fight of two Rams, and Cesars Thrasonicall brag of I came, saw, and
overcome. For your brother, and my sister, no sooner met, but they looked: no
sooner looked, but they loved; no sooner loved, but they sighed: no sooner
sighed but they asked one another the reason: no sooner knew the reason, but
they sought the remedy: and in these degrees, have they made a pair of
stairs to marriage, which they will climb incontinent, or else be
incontinent before marriage; they are in the very wrath of love, and they will
together. Clubbes cannot part them


They shall be married to morrow: and I will bid the Duke to the Nuptial. But
O, how bitter a thing it is, to look into happiness through another man's eyes:
by so much the more shall I to morrow be at the height of heart heaviness* by
how much I shall think my brother happy, in having what he wishes for


Why then to morrow, I cannot serve your turn for Rosalind?


I can live no longer by thinking.


I will weary you then no longer with idle talking. Know of me then (for now I
speak to some purpose) that I know you are a Gentleman of good conceit: I
speak not this, that you should bear a good opinion of my knowledge: insomuch
(I say) I know you arc:neither do I labor for a greater esteem then may in
some little measure draw a belief from you, to do your self good, and not to
grace me. Believe then, if you please, that I can do strange things: I have
since I was three year old conuerst with a Magitian, most profound in his Art,
and yet not damnable. If you do love Rosalinde so near the heart, as your
gesture cries it out: when your brother marries Aliena, shall you marry her. I
know into what straights of Fortune she is driven, and it is not impossible to
me, if it appear not inconvenient to you, to set her before your eyes to
morrow, humane as she is, and without any danger


Speak thou in sober meanings?


By my life I do, which I tender deerly, though I say I am a Magitian:
Therefore put you in your best array, bid your friends: for if you will be
married to morrow, you shall: and to Rosalind if you will

Look, here comes a Lover of mine, and a lover of hers.

Youth, you have done me much ungentleness,
To show the letter that I writ to you.

I care not if I have: it is my study
To seem despightfull and ungentle to you:
you are there followed by a faithful shepherd,
Look upon him, love him: he worships you.

Good shepherd, tell this youth what it is to love


It is to be all made of sighs and tears,
And so am I for Phebe.

And I for Ganimed.


And I for Rosalind.


And I for no woman.


It is to be all made of faith and service,
And so am I for Phebe.

And I for Ganimed.


And I for Rosalind.


And I for no woman.


It is to be all made of fantasy*
All made of passion, and all made o^ ^hes,
All adoration, duty, and obseruan^,
All humbleness, all patience, and impatience,
All purity, all trial, all observance:
And so am I for Phebe.

And so am I for Ganimed.


And so am I for Rosalind.


And so am I for no woman.


If this be so, why blame you me to love you?


If this be so, why blame you me to love you?


If this be so, why blame you me to love you?


Why do you speak too. Why blame you me to love you.


To her, that is not here, nor does not hear.


Pray you no more of this, it is like the howling of Irish Wolves against the
Moon: I will help you if I can: I would love you if I could: To morrow meet
me altogether: I will marry you, if ever I marry Woman, and I Will be married to
morrow: I will satisfy you* if ever I satisfied man, and you shall be married
to morrow. I will content you, if what pleases you contents you, and you shall be
married to morrow: As you love Rosalind meet, as you love Phebe meet, and as I
love no woman, I Will meet: so fare you well: I have left you commands


I Will not fail, if I live.


Nor I.


Nor I.


To morrow is the joyful day Audrey, to morrow will we be married.


I do desire it with all my heart: and I hope it is no dishonest desire, to
desire to be a woman of ye world? Here come two of the banished Dukes Pages


Well met honest Gentleman.


By my troth well met: come, sit, sit, and a song.


We are for you, sit in th middle.


Shall we clap into it roundly, without hauking, or spitting, or saying we are
hoarse, which are the only prologues to a bad voice


I faith, y' faith, and both in a tune like two gypsies on a horse.


It was a Lover, and his less,
With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino,
That over the green corn field did pass,
In the spring time, the only pretty rang time.
When Birds do sing, hey ding a ding, ding.
Sweet Lovers love the spring,
And therefore take the present time.
With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino,
For love is crowned with the prime.
In spring time, etc.
Between the acres of the Rye,
With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino:
These pretty Country folks would lie.
In spring time, etc.
This Carroll they began that hour,
With a hey and a ho, and a hey nonino:
How that a life was but a Flower,
In spring time, etc.

Truly young Gentlemen, though there was no great matter in the dittie, yet ye
note was very vntunabl


you are deceived Sir, we kept time, we lost not our time.


By my troth yes: I count it but time lost to hear such a foolish song. God
buy you, and God mend your voices. Come Audrie


Do thou believe Orlando, that the boy
Can do all this that he has promised?

I sometimes do believe, and sometimes do not,
As those that fear they hope, and know they fear.

Patience once more, whiles our co^pact is urged:
You say, if I bring in your Rosalinde,
You will bestow her on Orlando here?

That would I, had I kingdoms to give with her.


And you say you will have her, when I bring her?


That would I, were I of all kingdoms King.


You say, you will marry me, if I be willing.


That will I, should I die the hour after.


But if you do refuse to marry me,
You Will give your self to this most faithful Shepherd.

So is the bargain.


You say that you will have Phebe if she will.


Though to have her and death, were both one thing.


I have promised to make all this matter even:
Keep you your word, O Duke, to give your daughter,
You yours Orlando, to receive his daughter:
Keep you your word Phebe, that you will marry me,
Or else refusing me to wed this shepherd:
Keep your word Siluius, that you will marry her
If she refuse me, and from hence I go
To make these doubts all even.

I do remember in this shepherd boy,
Some lively touches of my daughters favor.

My Lord, the first time that I ever saw him,
Me thought he was a brother to your daughter:
But my good Lord, this Boy is Forest borne,
And has bin tutored in the rudiments
Of many desperate studies, by his uncle,
Whom he reports to be a great Magitian.
Obscured in the circle of this Forest.

There is sure another flood toward, and these couples are coming to the Arc.
Here comes a pair of very strange beasts, which in all tongues, are called
Fools


Salutation and greeting to you all.


Good my Lord, bid him welcome: This is the Motley-minded Gentleman, that I
have so often met in the Forest: he has bin a Courtier he swears


If any man doubt that, let him put me to my purgation, I have trod a measure,
I have flattred a Lady, I have bin politic with my friend, smooth with mine
enemy, I have undone three Tailors, I have had four quarrels, and like to
have fought one


And how was that taken up?


'Faith we met, and found the quarrel was upon the seventh cause.


How seventh cause? Good my Lord, like this fellow.


I like him very well.


God^ild you sir, I desire you of the like: I press in here sir, amongst the
rest of the Country copulatiues to swear, and to forswear, according as
marriage binds and blood breaks: a poor virgin sir, an il-fauor'd thing sir,
but mine own, a poor humor of mine sir, to take that that no man else will:
rich honesty dwells like a miser sir, in a poor house, as your Pearl in your
foul oyster


By my faith, he is very swift, and sententious


According to the fools bolt sir, and such dulcet diseases.


But for the seventh cause. How did you find the quarrel on the seventh cause?


Upon a lie, seven times removed: (bear your body more seeming Audry) as thus
sir: I did dislike the cut of a certain Courtiers beard: he sent me word, if I
said his beard was not cut well, he was in the mind it was: this is called
the retort courteous. If I sent him word again, it was not well cut, he would
send me word he cut it to please himself: this is called the quip modest. If
again, it was not well cut, he disabled my judgment: this is called, the reply
churlish. If again it was not well cut, he would answer I spoke not true: this
is called the reproof valiant. If again, it was not well cut, he would say, I
lie: this is called the counter-checke quarrelsome: and so to lie
circumstantiall, and the lie direct


And how often did you say his beard was not well cut?


I durst go no further then the lie circumstantial: nor he durst not give me
the lie direct: and so we measured swords, and parted


Can you nominate in order now, the degrees of the lie.


O sir, we quarrel in print, by the book: as you have books for good manners:
I will name you the degrees. The first, the Retort courteous: the second, the
Quip-modest: the third, the reply Churlish: the fourth, the Reproof valiant:
the fifth, the Counterchecke quarrelsome: the sixth, the Lie with circumstance:
the seventh, the Lie direct: all these you may avoid, but the Lie direct: and
you may avoid that too, with an If. I knew when seven Justices could not take
up a Quarrel, but when the parties were met themselves, one of them thought
but of an If; as if you said so, then I said so: and they shook hands, and
swore brothers. Your If, is the only peacemaker: much virtue in if


Is not this a rare fellow my Lord? He Is as good at any thing, and yet a fool.


He uses his folly like a stalking-horse, and under the presentation of that he
shoots his wit


Then is there mirth in heaven,
When earthly things made eauen atone together.
Good Duke receive thy daughter,
Hymen from Heaven brought her,
Yea brought her hither.
That thou might join his hand with his,
Whose heart within his bosom is.

To you I give my self, for I am yours.
To you I give my self, for I am yours.

If there be truth in sight, you are my daughter.


If there be truth in sight, you are my Rosalind.


If sight and shape be true, why then my love adieu


I Will have no Father, if you be not he:
I Will have no Husband, if you be not he:
Nor never wed woman, if you be not she.

Peace hoa: I bar confusion,
It Is I must make conclusion
Of these most strange events:
Here Is eight that must take hands,
To join in Hymen's bands,
If truth holds true contents.
You and you, no cross shall part;
You and you, are heart in heart:
You, to his love must accord,
Or have a Woman to your Lord.
You and you, are sure together,
As the Winter to foul Weather:
Whiles a Wedlock Hymn we sing,
Feed your selves with questioning:
That reason, wonder may diminish
How thus we met, and these things finish.

Wedding is great Iunos crown,
O blessed bond of board and bed:
It Is Hymen peoples every town,
High wedlock then be honored:
Honor, high honor and renowns
To Hymen, God of every Town.

O my dear Niece, welcome thou art to me,
Even daughter welcome, in no less degree.

I will not eat my word, now thou art mine,
Thy faith, my fancy to thee does combine.

Let me have audience for a word or two:
I am the second son of old Sir Rowland,
That bring these tidings to this fair assembly.
Duke Frederick hearing how that every day
Men of great worth resorted to this forest,
Addressed a mighty power, which were on foot
In his own conduct, purposely to take
His brother here, and put him to the sword:
And to the skirts of this wild Wood he came;
Where, meeting with an old Religious man,
After some question with him, was converted
Both from his enterprise, and from the world:
His crown bequeathing to his banished Brother,
And all their Lands restored to him again
That were with him exiled. This to be true,
I do engage my life.

Welcome young man:
Thou offer'st fairly to thy brothers wedding:
To one his lands withheld, and to the other
A land it self at large, a potent Dukedom.
First, in this Forest, let us do those ends
That here vvete well begun, and well begot:
And after, every of this happy number
That have endured shrewd days, and nights with us,
Shall share the good of our returned fortune,
According to the measure of their states.
Mean time, forget this new-falne dignity,
And fall into our Rusticke Reuelrie:
Play Music, and you Brides and Bride-groomes all,
With measure heaped in joy, to' th Measures fall.

Sir, by your patience: if I heard you rightly,
The Duke has put on a Religious life,
And thrown into neglect the pompous Court.

He has.


To him will I: out of these conuertites,
There is much matter to be heard, and learned:
you to your former Honor, I bequeath
your patience, and your virtue, well deserves it.
you to a love, that your true faith does merit:
you to your land, and love, and great allies:
you to a long, and well-deserued bed:
And you to wrangling, for thy loving voyage
Is but for two months victuall'd: So to your pleasures,
I am for other, then for dancing meazures.

Stay, Jacques, stay.


To see no pastime, I: what you would have,
I Will stay to know, at your abandoned cave.

Proceed, proceed: we will begin these rights,
As we do trust, they will end in true delights. --

It is not the fashion to see the Lady the Epilogue: but it is no more
unhandsome, then to see the Lord the Prologue. If it be true, that good wine
needs no bush, it is true, that a good play needs no Epilogue. Yet to good wine
they do use good bushes: and good plays prove the better by the help of good
Epilogues: What a case am I in then, that am neither a good Epilogue, nor
cannot insinuate with you in the behalf of a good play? I am not furnished
like a Beggar, therefore to beg will not become me. My way is to conjure
you, and I Will begin with the Women. I charge you (O women) for the love you
bear to men, to like as much of this Play, as please you: And I charge you (O
men) for the love you bear to women (as I perceive by your simpring, none of
you hates them) that between you, and the women, the play may please. If I
were a Woman, I would kiss as many of you as had beards that pleased me,
complexions that liked me, and breaths that I defi'de not: And I am sure, as
many as have good beards, or good faces, or sweet breaths, will for my kind
offer, when I make curt'sie, bid me farewell



