PRoceed Solinus to procure my fall,
And by the doom of death end woes and all.

Merchant of Siracusa, plead no more.
I am not partial to infringe our Laws;
The enmity and discord which of late
Sprung from the rancorous outrage of your Duke,
To Merchants our well-dealing Countrymen,
Who wanting gilders to redeem their lives,
Have sealed his rigorous statutes with their bloods,
Excludes all pity from our threatening looks:
For since the mortal and intestine iarres
Twixt thy seditious Countrymen and us,
It has in solemn Synodes been decreed,
Both by the Siracusians and our selves,
To admit no traffic to our adverse towns:
Nay more, if any borne at Ephesus
Be seen at any Siracusian Marts and Fayres:
Again, if any Siracusian borne
Come to the Bay of Ephesus, he dies:
His goods confiscate to the Dukes dispose,
Unless a thousand marks be levied
To quit the penalty, and to ransom him:
Thy substance, valued at the highest rate,
Cannot amount unto a hundred Marks,
Therefore by Law thou art condemned to die.

Yet this my comfort, when your words are done,
My woes end likewise with the evening Son.

Well Siracusian; say in brief the cause
Why thou departedst from thy native home?
And for what cause thou came to Ephesus.

A heavier task could not have been imposed,
Then I to speak my griefs unspeakable:
Yet that the world may witness that my end
Was wrought by nature, not by vile offense,
I Will utter what my sorrow gives me leave.
In Syracusa was I borne, and wedde
Unto a woman, happy but for me,
And by me; had not our hap been bad:
With her I lived in joy, our wealth increast
By prosperous voyages I often made
To Epidamium, till my factors death,
And he great care of goods at randone left,
Drew me from kind embracements of my spouse;
From whom my absence was not six months old,
Before her self (almost at fainting under
The pleasing punishment that women bear)
Had made provision for her following me,
And soon, and safe, arrived where I was:
There had she not been long, but she became
A joyful mother of two goodly sons:
And, which was strange, the one so like the other,
As could not be distinguished but by names.
That very hour, and in the selfsame Inn,
A mean woman was delivered
Of such a burden Male, twins both alike:
Those, for their parents were exceeding poor,
I bought, and brought up to attend my sons.
My wife, not meanly proud of two such boys,
Made daily motions for our home return:
Unwilling I agreed, alas, too soon we came aboard.
A league from Epidamium had we saild
Before the always winde-obeying deep
Gave any Tragic Instance of our harm:
But longer did we not retain much hope;
For what obscured light the heavens did grant,
Did but convey unto our fearful minds
A doubtful warrant of immediate death,
Which though my self would gladly have embraced,
Yet the incessant weepings of my wife,
Weeping before for what she saw must come,
And pitteous playnings of the pretty babes
That mourned for fashion, ignorant what to fear,
Forced me to seek delays for them and me,
And this it was: (for other means was none)
The Sailors sought for safety by our boat,
And left the ship then sinking ripe to us.
My wife, more careful for the latter borne,
Had fastened him unto a small spare Mast,
Such as seafaring men provide for storms:
To him one of the other twins was bound,
Whilst I had been like heedfull of the other.
The children thus disposed, my wife and I,
Fixing our eyes on whom our care was fixed,
Fastened our selves at either end the mast,
And floating straight, obedient to the stream,
Was carried toward Corinth, as we thought.
At length the son gazing upon the earth,
Dispersed those vapors that offended us,
And by the benefit of his wished light
The seas waxt calm, and we discovered
Two ships from far, making amain to us:
Of Corinth that, of Epidarus this,
But ere they came, oh let me say no more,
Gather the sequel by that went before.

Nay forward old man, do not break off so,
For we may pity, though not pardon thee.

Oh had the gods done so, I had not now
Worthily termed them merciless to us:
For ere the ships could meet by twice five leagues,
We were encountered by a mighty rock,
Which being violently borne up,
Our helpefull ship was splitted in the midst;
So that in this unjust divorce of us,
Fortune had left to both of us alike,
What to delight in, what to sorrow for,
Her part, poor soul, seeming as burdened
With lesser weight, but not with lesser woe,
Was carried with more speed before the wind,
And in our sight they three were taken up
By Fishermen of Corinth, as we thought.
At length another ship had seized on us,
And knowing whom it was their hap to save,
Gave healthful welcome to their ship-wrackt guests,
And would have reft the Fishers of their prey,
Had not their back been very slow of sail;
And therefore homeward did they bend their course.
Thus have you heard me seuer'd from my bliss,
That by misfortunes was my life prolonged,
To tell sad stories of my own mishaps.

And for the sake of them thou sorrowest for,
Do me the favor to dilate at full,
What have befalne of them and they till now.

My youngest boy, and yet my eldest care,
At eighteen years became inquisitiue
After his brother; and importuned me
That his attendant, so his case was like,
Reft of his brother, but retained his name,
Might bear him company in the quest of him:
Whom whilst I labored of a love to see,
I hazarded the loss of whom I loved.
Five Summers have I spent in farthest Greece,
Roming clean through the bounds of Asia,
And coasting homeward, came to Ephesus:
Hopeless to find, yet loath to leave unsought
Or that, or any place that harbors men:
But here must end the story of my life,
And happy were I in my timely death,
Could all my trauells warrant me they live.

Hapless Egeon whom the fates have marked
To bear the extremity of dire mishap:
Now trust me, were it not against our Laws,
Against my Crown, my oath, my dignity,
Which Princes would they may not disanull,
My soul should sue as advocate for thee:
But though thou art adjudged to the death,
And passed sentence may not be recal'd
But to our honors great disparagement:
Yet will I favor thee in what I can;
Therefore Merchant, I Will limit thee this day
To seek thy help by beneficial help,
Try all the friends thou have in Ephesus,
Beg thou, or borrow, to make up the sum,
And live: if no, then thou art doomed to die:
Iaylor, take him to thy custody.

I will my Lord.


Hopeless and helpelesse does Egean wend,
But to procrastinate his liuelesse end.

Therefore give out you are of Epidamium,
Lest that your goods too soon be confiscate:
This very day a Syracusian Merchant
Is apprehended for a rival here,
And not being able to buy out his life,
According to the statute of the town,
Dies ere the weary sun set in the West:
There is your money that I had to keep.

Go bear it to the Centaure, where we host,
And stay there Dromio, till I come to thee;
Within this hour it will be dinner time,
Till that I Will view the manners of the town,
Peruse the traders, gaze upon the buildings,
And then return and sleep within mine Inn,
For with long travail I am stiff and weary.
Get thee away.

Many a man would take you at your word,
And go indeed, having so good a mean.

A trusty villain sir, that very often,
When I am dull with care and melancholy,
Lightens my humor with his merry jests:
What will you walk with me about the town,
And then go to my Inn and dine with me?

I am invited sir to certain Merchants,
Of whom I hope to make much benefit:
I crave your pardon, soon at five a clock,
Please you, I Will meet with you upon the Mart,
And afterward consort you till bed time:
My present business calls me from you now.

Farewell till then: I will go loose my self,
And wander up and down to view the City.

Sir, I commend you to your own content.


He that commends me to mine own content,
Commends me to the thing I cannot get:
I to the world am like a drop of water,
That in the Ocean seeks another drop,
Who falling there to find his fellow forth,
(Unseen, inquisitiue) confounds himself.
So I, to find a Mother and a Brother,
In quest of them (unhappy a) loose my self.
Here comes the almanacke of my true date:
What now? How chance thou art returned so soon.

Returned so soon, rather approacht too late:
The Capon burns, the Pig falls from the spit;
The clock has stricken twelve upon the bell:
My Mistress made it one upon my cheek:
She is so hot because the meat is cold:
The meat is cold, because you come not home:
You come not home, because you have no stomach:
You have no stomach, having broke your fast:
But we that know what it is to fast and pray,
Are penitent for your default to day.

Stop in your wind sir, tell me this I pray?
Where have you left the money that I gave you.

Oh six pence that I had a wensday last,
To pay the Sadler for my Mistress crupper:
The Sadler had it Sir, I kept it not.

I am not in a sportiue humor now:
Tell me, and dally not, where is the money?
We being strangers here, how dare thou trust
So great a charge from thine own custody.

I pray you jest sir as you sit at dinner:
I from my Mistress come to you in post:
If I return I shall be post indeed.
For she will scour your fault upon my pate:
Me thinks your maw, like mine, should be your ^ooke,
And strike you home without a messenger.

Come Dromio, come, these ^ests are out of season,
Reserve them till a merrier hour then this:
Where is the gold I gave in charge to thee?

To me sir? why you gave no gold to me?


Come on sir knave, have done your foolishnes,
And tell me how thou ha^t disposed thy charge*

My charge was but to fetch you f^o^ the Mart
Home to your house, the Phoenix sir, to dinner;
My Mistress and her sister stays for you.

Now as I am a Christian answer me,
In what safe place you have bestowed my money;
Or I shall break that merry sconce of yours
That stands on tricks, when I am vndispos'd:
Where is the thousand Marks thou had of me?

I have some marks of yours upon my pate:
Some of my Mistress marks upon my shoulders:
But not a thousand marks between you both.
If I should pay your worship those again,
Perchance you will not bear them patiently.

Thy Mistress marks? what Mistress slave have thou?


Your worships wife, my Mistress at the Phoenix;
She that does fast till you come home to dinner:
And prays that you will hie you home to dinner.

What will thou flout me thus unto my face
Being forbid? There take you that sir knave.

What mean you sir, for God sake hold your hands:
Nay, and you will not sir, I Will take my heels.

Upon my life by some devise or other,
The villain is ore-wrought of all my money.
They say this town is full of cosenage:
As nimble Iuglers that deceive the eye:
Dark working Sorcerers that change the mind:
Soule-killing Witches, that deforme the body:
Disguised Cheaters, prating Mountebankes;
And many such like-liberties of sin:
If it prove so, I will be gone the sooner:
I Will to the Centaur to go seek this slave,
I greatly fear my money is not safe.

Neither my husband nor the slave returned,
That in such haste I sent to seek his Master?
Sure Luciana it is two a clock.

Perhaps some Merchant has invited him,
And from the Mart he is somewhere gone to dinner:
Good Sister let us dine, and never fret;
A man is Master of his liberty:
Time is their Master, and when they see time,
They Will go or come; if so, be patient Sister.

Why should their liberty then ours be more?


Because their business still lies out adore.


Look when I serve him so, he takes it thus.


Oh, know he is the bridle of your will.


There Is none but asses will be bridled so.


Why, headstrong liberty is lasht wi^h woe:
There Is nothing situate under ^ens eye,
But has his bound in earth, in ^ea, in sky.
The beasts, the fishes, and the winged fowls
Are their males subjects, and at ^he^r controules:
Man more divine, the Master of all these,
Lord of the wide world, and wild watery seas,
Endued with intellectual sense and souls,
Of more pre-eminence then fish and fowls,
Are masters to their females, and their Lords:
Then let your will attend on their accords.

This servitude makes you to keep vnwed.


Not this, but troubles of the marriage bed.


But were you wedded, you would bear some sway


Ere I learned love; I Will practice to obey.


How if your husband start some other where?


Till he come home again, I would for bear.


Patience unmoved, no marvel though she pause,
They can be meek, that have no other cause:
A wretched soul bruised with adversity,
We bid be quiet when we hear it cry.
But were we burdned with like weight of pain,
As much, or more, we should our selves complain:
So thou that have no unkind mate to grieve thee,
With urging helpelesse patience would relieve me;
But if thou live to see like right bereft^,
This foole-beg'd patience in thee will be left.

Well, I will marry one day but to try:
Here comes your man, now is your husband nie.

Say, is your tardie master now at hand?


Nay, he is at too hands with me, and that my two ears can witness.


Say, did thou speak with him? know thou his mind?


I, I, he told his mind upon mine ear,
Beshrew his hand, I scarce could understand it.

Spoke he so doubtfully, thou could not feel his meaning.


Nay, he struck so plainly, I could too well feel his blows; and withal so
doubtfully, that I could scarce understand them


But say, I prithee, is he coming home?
It seems he has great care to please his wife.

Why Mistress, sure my Master is horn mad.


Horn mad, thou villain?


I mean not Cuckold mad,
But sure he is stark mad:
When I desired him to come home to dinner,
He asked me for a hundred marks in gold:
It Is dinner time* quoth I: my gold, quoth he:
Your meat does burn, quoth I: my gold quoth he:
Will you come, quoth I: my gold, quoth he;
Where is the thousand marks I gave thee villain?
The Pigge quoth I, is burned: my gold, quoth he:
My mistress, sir, quoth I: hang up thy Mistress:
I know not thy mistress, out on thy mistress.

Quoth who?


Quoth my Master, I know quoth he, no house, no wife, no mistress: so that my
arrant due unto my tongue, I thank him, I bare home upon my shoulders: for in
conclusion, he did beat me there


Go back again, thou slave, and fetch him home.


Go back again, and be new beaten home*
For Gods sake send some other messenger.

Back slave, or I will break thy pate a-crosse.


And he will bless yt cross with other beating*
Between you, I shall have a holy head.

Hence prating pesant, fetch thy Master home.


Am I so round with you, as you with me,
That like a football you do spurn me thus:
You spurn me hence, and he will spurn me hither,
If I last in this service, you must case me in leather.

Fie how impatience lowreth in your face.


His company must do his minions grace,
Whilst I at home starve for a merry look:
Has homely age the alluring beauty took
From my poor check? then he has wasted it.
Are my discourses dull? Barren my wit,
If voluble and sharp discourse be marred,
Unkindness blunts it more then marble hard.
Do their gay vestments his affections bait?
That Is not my fault, he is master of my state.
What ruins are in me that can be found,
By him not ruined? Then is he the ground
Of my defeatures. My decayed fair,
A sunnie look of his, would soon repair.
But, too unruly Dear, he breaks the pale,
And feeds from home; poor I am but his stale.

Selfe-harming Jealousy; fie beat it hence.


Unfeeling fools can with such wrongs dispense:
I know his eye does homage other-where,
Or else, what lets it but he would be here?
Sister, you know he promised me a chain,
Would that alone, a love he would detain,
So he would keep fair quarter with his bed:
I see the Jewel best enamaled
Will loose his beauty: yet the gold bides still
That others touch, and often touching will,
Where gold and no man that has a name,
By falsehood and corruption does it shame:
Since that my beauty cannot please his eye,
I Will weep (what is left away) and weeping die.

How many fond fools serve mad Jealousy?


The gold I gave to Dromio is laid up
Safe at the Centaur, and the heedfull slave
Is wandered forth in care to seek me out
By computation and mine hosts report.
I could not speak with Dromio, since at first
I sent him from the Mart? see here he comes.
How now sir, is your merry humor altered?
As you love strokes, so jest with me again:
You know no Centaur? you received no gold?
Your Mistress sent to have me home to dinner?
My house was at the Phoenix? Wast thou mad,
That thus so madlie thou did did answer me?

What answer sir? when spoke I such a word?


Even now, even here, not half an hour since.


I did not see you since you sent me hence
Home to the Centaur with the gold you gave me.

Villain, thou did deny the golds receipt,
And toldst me of a Mistress, and a dinner,
For which I hope thou feltst I was displeased.

I am glad to see you in this merry vain,
What means this jest, I pray you Master tell me?

Yea, do thou ieere and flowt me in the teeth?
Think you I jest? hold, take thou that, and that. Beats Dro.

Hold sir, for Gods sake, now your jest is earnest,
Upon what bargain do you give it me?

Because that I familiarlie sometimes
Do use you for my fool, and chat with you,
Your sauciness will jest upon my love,
And make a Common of my serious hours,
When the sun shines, let foolish gnats make sport,
But creep in crannies, when he hides his beams:
If you will jest with me, know my aspect,
And fashion your demeanor to my looks,
Or I will beat this method in your sconce.

Sconce call you it? so you would leave battering, I had rather have it a head,
and you use these blows long, I must get a sconce for my head, and Insconce it
to, or else I shall seek my wit in my shoulders, but I pray sir, why am I
beaten


Do thou not know?


Nothing sir, but that I am beaten.


Shall I tell you why?


I sir, and wherefore; for they say, every why has a wherefore.


Why first for flowting me, and then wherefore, for urging it the second time
to me


Was there ever any man thus beaten out of season, when in the why and the
wherefore, is neither rhyme nor reason. Well sir, I thank you


Thank me sir, for what?


Marry sir, for this something that you gave me for nothing.


I Will make you amends next, to give you nothing for something. But say sir, is
it dinner time


No sir, I think the meat wants that I have.


In good time sir: what is that?


Basting.


Well sir, then 'twill be dry.


If it be sir, I pray you eat none of it.


Your reason?


Lest it make you chollericke, and purchase me another dry basting.


Well sir, learn to jest in good time, there is a time for all things.


I durst have denied that before you were so chollericke.


By what rule sir?


Marry sir, by a rule as plain as the plain bald pate of Father time himself.


Let Us hear it.


There Is no time for a man to recover his hair that grows bald by nature.


May he not do it by fine and recovery?


Yes, to pay a fine for a perewig, and recover the lost hair of another man.


Why, is Time such a niggard of hair, being (as it is) so plentiful an
excrement


Because it is a blessing that he bestows on beasts, and what he has scanted
them in hair, he has given them in wit


Why, but there is many a man has more hair then wit.


Not a man of those but he has the wit to lose his hair.


Why thou did conclude hairy men plain dealers without wit.


The plainer dealer, the sooner lost; yet he loses it in a kind of iollitie.


For what reason.


For two, and sound ones to.


Nay not sound I pray you.


Sure ones then.


Nay, not sure in a thing falsing.


Certain ones then.


Name them.


The one to save the money that he spends in trying: the other, that at dinner
they should not drop in his porrage


You would all this time have proved, here is no time for all things.


Marry and did sir: namely, in no time to recover hair lost by Nature.


But your reason was not substantial, why there is no time to recover.


Thus I mend it: Time himself is bald, and therefore to the worlds end, will
have bald followers


I knew 'twould be a bald conclusion: but soft, who wafts us yonder.


I, I. Antipholus, look strange and frown,
Some other Mistress has thy sweet aspects:
I am not Adriana, nor thy wife.
The time was once, when thou vn-vrg'd would vow,
That never words were music to thine ear,
That never object pleasing in thine eye,
That never touch well welcome to thy hand,
That never meat sweet-fauour'd in thy taste,
Unless I spoke, or looked, or touched, or carved to thee.
How comes it now, my Husband, oh how comes it,
That thou art then estranged from thy self?
Thy self I call it, being strange to me:
That vndiuidable Incorporate
Am better then thy dear selfs better part.
Ah do not tear away thy self from me;
For know my love: as easy may thou fall
A drop of water in the breaking gulf,
And take unmingled thence that drop again
Without addition or diminishing,
As take from me thy self, and not me too.
How dearly would it touch thee to the quick,
Should thou but hear I were licencious?
And that this body consecrate to thee,
By Ruffian Lust should be contaminate?
Would thou not spit at me, and spurn at me,
And hurl the name of husband in my face,
And tear the stained skin of my Harlot brow,
And from my false hand cut the wedding ring,
And break it with a deepe-diuorcing vow?
I know thou can, and therefore see thou do it.
I am possessed with an adulterate blot,
My blood is mingled with the crime of lust:
For if we two be one, and thou play false,
I do digest the poison of thy flesh,
Being strumpeted by thy contagion*
Keep then fair league and truce with thy true bed,
I live distained, thou vndishonoured.

Plead you to me fair dame? I know you not:
In Ephesus I am but two hours old,
As strange unto your town, as to your talk,
Who every word by all my wit being scanned,
Wants wit in all, one word to understand.

Fie brother, how the world is changed with you:
When were you wont to use my sister thus?
She sent for you by Dromio home to dinner.

By Dromio?


By me.


By thee, and this thou did return from him.
That he did buffet thee, and in his blows,
Denied my house for his, me for his wife.

Did you converse sir with this gentlewoman:
What is the course and drift of your compact?

I sir? I never saw her till this time.


Villain thou lie, for even her very words,
Did thou deliver to me on the Mart.

I never spoke with her in all my life.


How can she thus then call us by our names?
Unless it be by inspiration.

How ill agrees it with your gravity,
To counterfeit thus grosely with your slave,
Abetting him to thwart me in my mood;
Be it my wrong, you are from me exempt,
But wrong not that wrong with a more contempt.
Come I will fasten on this sleeue of thine:
Thou art an Elm my husband, I a Vine:
Whose weakness married to thy stranger state,
Makes me with thy strength to communicate:
If ought possess thee from me, it is dross,
Usurping Iuie, Brier, or idle Moss,
Who all for want of pruning, with intrusion,
Infect thy sap, and live on thy confusion.

To me she speaks, she moves me for her theme;
What, was I married to her in my dream?
Or sleep I now, and think I hear all this?
What error drives our eyes and ears amiss?
Until I know this sure uncertainty,
I Will entertain the freed fallacy.

Dromio, go bid the servants spread for dinner.


Oh for my beads, I cross me for a sinner.
This is the Fairie land, oh spite of spights,
We talk with Goblins, Owls and Sprights;
If we obey them not, this will ensue:
They Will suck our breath, or pinch us black and blew.

Why prat'st thou to thy self, and answer'st not?
Dromio, thou Dromio, thou snaile, thou slug, thou sot.

I am transformed Master, am I not?


I think thou art in mind, and so am I.


Nay Master, both in mind, and in my shape.


Thou have thine own form.


No, I am an Ape.


If thou art changed to ought, it is to an Ass.


It Is true she rides me, and I long for grass.
It Is so, I am an Ass, else it could never be,
But I should know her as well as she knows me.

Come, come, no longer will I be a fool,
To put the finger in the eye and weep;
Whilst man and Master laughes my woes to scorn:
Come sir to dinner, Dromio keep the gate:
Husband I Will dine above with you to day,
And shriue you of a thousand idle prankes:
Sir, if any ask you for your Master,
Say he dines forth, and let no creature enter:
Come sister, Dromio play the Porter well.

Am I in earth, in heaven, or in hell?
Sleeping or waking, mad or well aduisde:
Known unto these, and to my self disguisde:
I Will say as they say, and persevere so:
And in this mist at all adventures go.

Master, shall I be Porter at the gate?


I, and let none enter, least I break your pate.


Come, come, Antipholus, we dine to late.


Good signior Angelo you must excuse us all,
My wife is shrewish when I keep not hours;
Say that I lingerd with you at your shop
To see the making of her Carkanet,
And that to morrow you will bring it home.
But here is a villain that would face me down
He met me on the Mart, and that I beat him,
And charged him with a thousand marks in gold,
And that I did deny my wife and house;
Thou drunkard thou, what did thou mean by this?

Say what you will sir, but I know what I know,
That you beat me at the Mart I have your hand to show;
If ye skin were parchment, and ye blows you gave were ink,
Your own handwriting would tell you what I think.

I think thou art an ass.


Marry so it does appear
By the wrongs I suffer, and the blows I bear,
I should kick being kicked, and being at that pass,
You would keep from my heels, and beware of an ass.

Y' are sad signior Balthazar, pray God our cheer
May answer my good will, and your good welcome here.

I hold your dainties cheap sir, and your welcome deer.


Oh signior Balthazar, either at flesh or fish,
A table full of welcome, makes scarce one dainty dish.

Good meat sir is common that every churl affords.


And welcome more common, for that's nothing but words.


Small cheer and great welcome, makes a merry feast.


I, to a niggardly Host, and more sparing guest:
But though my cates be mean, take them in good part,
Better cheer may you have, but not with better heart.
But soft, my door is locked; go bid them let us in.

Maud, Briget, Marian, Cisley, Gillian, Ginn.


Mome, Malthorse, Capon, Coxcombe, Idiot, Patch,
Either get thee from the door, or sit down at the hatch:
Do thou conjure for wenches, that you calst for such store,
When one is one too many, go get thee from the door.

What patch is made our Porter? my Master stays in the street.


Let him walk from whence he came, lest he catch cold on's feet.


Who talks within there? hoa, open the door.


Right sir, I Will tell you when, and you will tell me wherefore.


Wherefore? for my dinner: I have not dined to day.


Nor to day here you must not come again when you may.


What art thou that keep'st me out from the house I owe?


The Porter for this time Sir, and my name is Dromio.


O villain, thou have stolen both mine office and my name,
The one nere got me credit, the other mickle blame:
If thou had been Dromio to day in my place,
Thou would have changed thy face for a name, or thy name for an ass.

What a coile is there Dromio? who are those at the gate?


Let my Master in Luce.


Faith no, he comes too late, and so tell your Master.


O Lord I must laugh, have at you with a Proverb,
Shall I set in my staff.

Have at you with another, that is when? can you tell?


If thy name be called Luce, Luce thou have answered him well.


Do you hear you minion, you will let us in I hope?


I thought to have asked you.


And you said no.


So come help, well struck, there was blow for blow.


Thou baggage let me in.


Can you tell for whose sake?


Master, knock the door hard.


Let him knock till it ache.


You Will cry for this minion, if I beat the door down.


What needs all that, and a pair of stocks in the town?


Who is that at the door yt keeps all this noise?


By my troth your town is troubled with unruly boys.


Are you there Wife? you might have come before.


Your wife sir knave? go get you from the door.


If you went in pain Master, this knave would go sore.


Here is neither cheer sir, nor welcome, we would feign have either.


In debating which was best, we shall part with neither.


They stand at the door, Master, bid them welcome hither.


There is something in the wind, that we cannot get in.


You would say so Master, if your garments were thin.
Your cake here is warm within: you stand here in the cold.
It would make a man mad as a Bucke to be so bought and sold.

Go fetch me something, I Will break open the gate.


Break any breaking here, and I Will break your knaves pate.


A man may break a word with your sir, and words are but wind;
I and break it in your face, so he break it not behind.

It seems thou want breaking, out upon thee hind.


Here Is too much out upon thee, I pray thee let me in.


I, when fowls have no feathers, and fish have no sin.


Well, I Will break in: go borrow me a crow.


A crow without feather, Master mean you so;
For a fish without a finne, there is a foul without afether,
If a crow help us in sir, we will pluck a crow together.

Go, get thee gone, fetch me an iron Crow.


Have patience sir, oh let it not be so,
Herein you war against your reputation,
And draw within the compass of suspect
The unviolated honor of your wife.
Once this your long experience of your wisdom,
Her sober virtue, years, and modesty,
Plead on your part some cause to you unknown;
And doubt not sir, but she will well excuse
Why at this time the doors are made against you.
Be ruled by me, depart in patience,
And let us to the Tiger all to dinner,
And about evening come your self alone,
To know the reason of this strange restraint:
If by strong hand you offer to break in
Now in the stirring passage of the day,
A vulgar comment will be made of it;
And that supposed by the common rowt
Against your yet vngalled estimation,
That may with foul intrusion enter in,
And dwell upon your grave when you are dead;
For slander lives upon succession;
For ever hows'd, where it gets possession.

You have prevailed, I will depart in quiet,
And in despite of mirth mean to be merry:
I know a wench of excellent discourse,
Pretty and witty; wild, and yet too gentle;
There will we dine: this woman that I mean
My wife (but I protest without desert)
Has oftentimes vpbraided me withal:
To her will we to dinner, get you home
And fetch the chain, by this I know it is made,
Bring it I pray you to the Porpentine,
For there is the house: That chain will I bestow
(Be it for nothing but to spite my wife)
Upon mine hostess there, good sir make hafte*
Since mine own doors refuse to entertain me,
I Will knock elsewhere, to see if they will disdain me.

I Will meet you at that place some hour hence.


Do so, this jest shall cost me some expense.


And may it be that you have quite forgot
A husbands office? shall Antipholus
Even in the spring of Love, thy Loue-springs rot?
Shall love in buildings grow so ruinate?
If you did wed my sister for her wealth,
Then for her wealths-sake use her with more kindness:
Or if you like elsewhere do it by stealth,
Muffle your false love with some show of blindness:
Let not my sister read it in your eye:
Be not thy tongue thy own shames Orator:
Look sweet, speak fair, become disloyalty:
Apparel vice like virtues harbenger:
Bear a fair presence, though your heart be tainted,
Teach sin the carriage of a holy Saint,
Be secret false: what need she be acquainted?
What simple thief brags of his own attain?
It Is double wrong to truant with your bed,
And let her read it in thy looks at board:
Shame has a bastard fame, well managed,
Ill deeds is doubled with an evil word:
Alas poor women, make us not believe
(Being compact of credit) that you love us,
Though others have the arm, show us the sleeue:
We in your motion turn, and you may move us.
Then gentle brother get you in again;
Comfort my sister, cheer her, call her wise;
It Is holy sport to be a little vain,
When the sweet breath of flattery conquers strife.

Sweet Mistress, what your name is else I know not;
Nor by what wonder you do hit of mine:
Less in your knowledge, and your grace you show not,
Then our earths wonder, more then earth divine.
Teach me dear creature how to think and speak:
Lay open to my earthie gross conceit:
Smothred in errors, feeble, shallow, weak,
The foulded meaning of your words deceit:
Against my souls pure truth, why labor you,
To make it wander in an unknown field?
Are you a god? would you create me new?
Transform me then, and to your power I Will yield.
But if that I am I, then well I know,
Your weeping sister is no wife of mine,
Nor to her bed no homage do I owe:
Far more, far more, to you do I decline:
Oh train me not sweet Mermaide with thy note,
To drown me in thy sister flood of tears:
Sing Siren for thy self, and I will dote:
Spread ore the silver waves thy golden hairs;
And as a bud I Will take thee, and there lie:
And in that glorious supposition think,
He gains by death, that has such means to die:
Let Love, being light, be drowned if she sink.

What are you mad, that you do reason so?


Not mad, but mated, how I do not know.


It is a fault that springs from your eye.


For gazing on your beams fair sun being by.


Gaze when you should, and that will clear your sight.


As good to wink sweet love, as look on night.


Why call you me love? Call my sister so.


Thy sisters sister.


That Is my sister.


No: it is thy self, mine own selfs better part:
Mine eyes clear eye, my dear hearts deerer heart;
My food, my fortune, and my sweet hopes aim;
My sole earths heaven, and my heavens claim.

All this my sister is, or else should be.


Call thy self sister sweet, for I am thee:
Thee will I love, and with thee lead my life;
Thou have no husband yet, nor I no wife:
Give me thy hand.

Oh soft sir, hold you still:
I Will fetch my sister to get her good will.

Why how now Dromio, where run'st thou so fast?


Do you know me sir? Am I Dromio? Am I your man? Am I my self?


Thou art Dromio, thou art my man, thou art thy self.


I am an ass, I am a woman's man, and besides my self.


What woman's man? and how besides thy self?


Marry sir, besides my self, I am due to a woman:
One that claims me, one that haunts me, one that will have me.

What claim lays she to thee?


Marry sir, such claim as you would lay to your horse, and she would have me
as a beast, not that I being a beast she would have me, but that she being a
very beastly creature lays claim to me


What is she?


A very reverent body: I such a one, as a man may not speak of, without he say
sir reverence, I have but lean luck in the match, and yet is she a wondrous
fat marriage


How do thou mean a fat marriage?


Marry sir, she is the Kitchen wench, and al grease, and I know not what use to
put her too, but to make a Lamp of her, and run from her by her own light. I
warrant, her rags and the Tallow in them, will burn a Poland Winter: If she
lives till doomesday, she will burn a week longer then the whole World


What complexion is she of?


Swart like my shoo, but her face nothing like so clean kept: for why? she
sweats a man may go ouer-shooes in the grime of it


That Is a fault that water will mend.


No sir, it is in grain, Noah's stood could not do it.


What Is her name?


Nell Sir: but her name is three quarters, that is an Ell and three quarters,
will not measure her from hip to hip


Then she bears some breadth?


No longer from head to foot, then from hippe to hippe: she is sphericall, like
a globe: I could find out Countries in her


In what part of her body stands Ireland?


Marry sir in her buttockes, I found it out by the bogges.


Where Scotland?


I found it by the barrenness, hard in the palm of the hand.


Where France?


In her forhead, armed and reuerted, making war against her heir.


Where England?


I looked for the chalkle Cliffes, but I could find no whiteness in them. But
I guess, it stood in her chin by the salt theume that ran between France,
and it


Where Spain?


Faith I saw it not: but I felt it hot in her breath.


Where America, the Indies?


Oh sir, upon her nose, all ore embellished with Rubies, Carbuncles, Saphires,
declining their rich Aspect to the hot breath of Spain, who sent whole
Armadoes of Carrects to be ballast at her nose


Where stood Belgia, the Netherlands?


Oh sir, I did not look so low. To conclude, this drudge or Diuiner laid
claim to me, called me Dromio, swore I was assured to her, told me what
privy marks I had about me, as the mark of my shoulder, the Mole in my
neck, the great Wart on my left arm, that I amazed ran from her as a witch.
And I think, if my breast had not been made of faith, and my heart of steel,
she had transformed me to a Curtull dog, and made me turn in th wheel


Go hie thee presently post to the rode,
And if the wind blow any way from shore,
I will not harbor in this Town to night.
If any Bark put forth, come to the Mart,
Where I will walk till thou return to me:
If every one knows us, and we know none,
It Is time I think to trudge, pack, and be gone.

As from a Bear a man would run for life,
So fly I from her that would be my wife.

There Is none but Witches do inhabit here,
And therefore it is hie time that I were hence:
She that does call me husband, even my soul
Does for a wife abhor. But her fair sister
Possessed with such a gentle sovereign grace,
Of such enchanting presence and discourse,
Has almost made me Traitor to my self:
But least my self be guilty to self wrong,
I Will stop mine ears against the Mermaids song.

Mr Antipholus.


I that is my name.


I know it well sir, lo here is the chain,
I thought to have taken you at the Porpentine,
The chain vnfinish'd made me stay thus long.

What is your will that I shall do with this?


What please your self sir: I have made it for you.


Made it for me sir, I bespoke it not.


Not once, nor twice, but twenty times you have:
Go home with it, and please your Wife withal,
And soon at supper time I Will visit you,
And then receive my money for the chain.

I pray you sir receive the money now,
For fear you never see chain, nor money more.

You are a merry man sir, fare you well.


What I should think of this, I cannot tell:
But this I think, there is no man is so vain,
That would refuse so fair an offered Chain.
I see a man here needs not live by shifts,
When in the streets he meets such Golden gifts:
I Will to the Mart, and there for Dromio stay,
If any ship put out, then straight away.

You know since Pentecost the sum is due,
And since I have not much importuned you,
Nor now I had not, but that I am bound
To Persia, and want Gilders for my voyage:
Therefore make present satisfaction,
Or I Will attach you by this Officer.

Even just the sum that I do owe to you,
Is growing to me by Antipholus,
And in the instant that I met with you,
He had of me a Chain, at five a clock
I shall receive the money for the same:
Pleases you walk with me down to his house,
I will discharge my bond, and thank you too.

That labor may you save: See where he comes.


While I go to the Goldsmiths house, go thou
And buy a ropes end, that will I bestow
Among my wife, and their confederates,
For locking me out of my doors by day:
But soft I see the Goldsmith; get thee gone,
Buy thou a rope, and bring it home to me.

I buy a thousand pound a year, I buy a rope.


A man is well help up that trusts to you,
I promised your presence, and the Chain,
But neither Chain nor Goldsmith came to me:
Belike you thought our love would last too long
If it were chained together: and therefore came not.

Saving your merry humor: here is the note
How much your Chain weighs to the utmost charect,
The finenesse of the Gold, and chargefull fashion,
Which does amount to three odd Ducats more
Then I stand debted to this Gentleman,
I pray you see him presently discharged,
For he is bound to Sea, and stays but for it.

I am not furnished with the present money:
Besides I have some business in the town,
Good Signior take the stranger to my house,
And with you take the Chain, and bid my wife
Disburse the sum, on the receipt thereof,
Perchance I will be there as soon as you.

Then you will bring the Chain to her your self.


No bear it with you, least I come not time enough.


Well sir, I will? Have you the Chain about you?


And if I have not sir, I hope you have:
Or else you may return without your money.

Nay come I pray you sir, give me the Chain:
Both wind and tide stays for this Gentleman,
And I too blame have held him here too long.

Good Lord, you use this dalliance to excuse
Your breach of promise to the Porpentine,
I should have chid you for not bringing it,
But like a shrew you first begin to brawle.

The hour steals on, I pray you sir dispatch.


You hear how he importunes me, the Chain.


Why give it to my wife, and fetch your money.


Come, come, you know I gave it you even now.
Either send the Chain, or send me by some token.

Fie, now you run this humor out of breath,
Come where is the Chain, I pray you let me see it.

My business cannot brook this dalliance,
Good sir say, whe'r you will answer me, or no:
If not, I Will leave him to the Officer.

I answer you? What should I answer you.


The money that you owe me for the Chain.


I owe you none, till I receive the Chain.


You know I gave it you half an hour since.


You gave me none, you wrong me much to say so.


You wrong me more sir in denying it.
Consider how it stands upon my credit.

Well Officer, arrest him army suite.


I do, and charge you in the Dukes name to obey me.


This touches me in reputation.
Either consent to pay this sum for me,
Or I attach you by this Officer.

Consent to pay thee that I never had:
Arrest me foolish fellow if thou dare.

Here is thy fee, arrest him Officer.
I would not spare my brother in this case,
If he should scorn me so apparently.

I do arrest you sir, you hear the suite.


I do obey thee, till I give thee bail.
But sirrah, you shall buy this sport as dear,
As all the metal in your shop will answer.

Sir, sir, I shall have Law in Ephesus,
To your notorious shame, I doubt it not.

Master, there is a Bark of Epidamium,
That stays but till her Owner comes aboard,
And then sir she bears away. Our fraughtage sir,
I have conuei'd aboard, and I have bought
The Oil, the Balsamum, and Aqua-vitae.
The ship is in her trim, the merry wind
Blows fair from land: they stay for naught at all,
But for their Owner, Master, and your self.

How now? a Madman? Why thou peevish sheep
What ship of Epidamium stays for me.

A ship you sent me too, to hier waftage.


Thou drunken slave, I sent thee for a rope,
And told thee to what purpose, and what end.

You sent me for a ropes end as soon,
You sent me to the Bay sir, for a Bark.

I will debate this matter at more leisure
And teach your ears to list me with more heed:
To Adriana Villain hie thee straight:
Give her this key, and tell her in the Deske
That Is covered over with Turkish Tapistrie,
There is a purse of Ducats, let her send it:
Tell her, I am arrested in the street,
And that shall bail me: hie thee slave, be gone,
On Officer to prison, till it come.

To Adriana, that is where we dined,
Where Dowsabell did claim me for her husband,
She is too big I hope for me to compass,
Thither I must, although against my will:
For servants must their Masters minds fulfill.

Ah Luciana, did he tempt thee so?
Might thou perceive austeerely in his eye,
That he did plead in earnest, yea or no:
Looked he or red or pale, or sad or merrily?
What observation made thou in this case?
Oh, his hearts Meteors tilting in his face.

First he deni'de you had in him no right.


He meant he did me none: the more my spite


Then swore he that he was a stranger here.


And true he swore, though yet forsworn he were.


Then pleaded I for you.


And what said he?


That love I begged for you, he begged of me.


With what persuasion did he tempt thy love?


With words, that in an honest suit might move.
First, he did praise my beauty, then my speech.

Did speak him fair?


Have patience I beseech.


I cannot, nor I will not hold me still,
My tongue, though not my heart, shall have his will.
He is deformed, crooked, old, and sere,
Ill-fac'd, worse bodied, shapelesse every where:
Vicious, ungentle, foolish, blunt, unkind,
Stigmaticall in making worse in mind.

Who would be jealous then of such a one?
No evil lost is wail'd, when it is gone.

Ah but I think him better then I say:
And yet would herein others eyes were worse:
Far from her nest the Lapwing cries away:
My heart prays for him, though my tongue do curse.

Here go: the deske, the purse, sweet now make haste.


How have thou lost thy breath?


By running fast.


Where is thy Master Dromio? Is he well?


No, he is in Tartar limbo, worse then hell:
A devil in an everlasting garment has him;
On whose hard heart is buttoned up with steel:
A Feind, a Fairie, pitiless and ruff:
A Wolf, nay worse, a fellow all in buffe*
A back friend, a shoulder-clapper, one that counterma^ds
The passages of allies, creekes, and narrow lands:
A hound that runs Counter, and yet draws drifoot well,
One that before the Judgment carries poor souls to hell.

Why man, what is the matter?


I do not know the matter, he is rested on the case.


What is he arrested? tell me at whose suite?


I know not at whose suite he is arested well; but is in a suite of buffe which
rested him, that can I tell, will you send him Mistress redemption, the money in
his deske


Go fetch it Sister: this I wonder at.
Thus he unknown to me should be in debt:
Tell me, was he arested on a band?

Not on a band, but on a stronger thing:
A chain, a chain, do you not here it ring.

What, the chain?


No, no, the bell, it is time that I were gone:
It was two ere I left him, and now the clock strikes one.

The hours come back, that did I never here.


Oh yes, if any hour meet a Serieant, a turns back for very fear.


As if time were in debt: how fondly do thou reason?


Time is a very bankerout, and owes more then he is worth to season.
Nay, he is a thief too: have you not heard men say,
That time comes stealing on by night and day?
If I be in debt and theft, and a Serieant in the way,
Has he not reason to turn back an hour in a day?

Go Dromio, there is the money, bear it straight,
And bring thy Master home imediately.
Come sister, I am pressed down with conceit:
Conceit, my comfort and my injury.

There Is not a man I meet but does salute me
As if I were their well acquainted friend,
And every one does call me by my name:
Some tender money to me, some inuit me;
Some other give me thanks for kindnesses;
Some offer me Commodities to buy.
Even now a' tailor called me in his shop,
And showed me Silks that he had bought for me,
And therewithal took measure of my body.
Sure these are but imaginary wiles,
And lapland Sorcerers inhabit here.
Master, here is the gold you sent me for: what have you got the picture of old
Adam new apparel'd


What gold is this? What Adam do thou mean?


Not that Adam that kept the Paradise: but that Adam that keeps the prison;
he that goes in the calues-skin, that was killed for the Prodigal: he that
came behind you sir, like an evil angel, and bid you forsake your liberty


I understand thee not.


No? why it is a plain case: he that went like a Base-Viole in a case of
leather; the man sir, that when gentlemen are tired gives them a sob, and rests
them: he sir, that takes pity on decayed men, and gives them suites of
durance: he that sets up his rest to do more exploits with his Mace, then a
Moris Pike


What thou mean an officer?


I sir, the Serieant of the Band: he that brings any man to answer it that
breaks his Band: one that thinks a man always going to bed, and says, God
give you good rest


Well sir, there rest in your foolerie:
Is there any ships puts forth to night? may we be gone?

Why sir, I brought you word an hour since, that the Bark Expedition put
forth to night, and then were you hindered by the Serieant to tarry for the Hoy
Delay: Here are the angels that you sent for to deliver you


The fellow is distract, and so am I,
And here we wander in illusions:
Some blessed power deliver us from hence.

Well met, well met, Master Antipholous:
I see sir you have found the Goldsmiths now:
Is that the chain you promised me to day.

Satan avoid, I charge thee tempt me not.


Master, is this Mistress Satan?


It is the devil.


Nay, she is worse, she is the devils dam: And here she comes in the habit of a
light wench, and thereof comes, that the wenches say God dam me, That Is as much
to say, God make me a light wench: It is written* they appear to men like
angels of light, light is an effect of fire, and fire will burn: ergo, light
wenches will burn, come not near her


Your man and you are maruailous merry sir.
Will you go with me, we will mend our dinner here?

Master, if do expect spoon-meate, or bespeake a long spoone.


Why Dromio?


Marry he must have a long spoone that must eat with the devil.


Avoid then fiend, what tel'st thou me of supping?
Thou art, as you are all a sorceresse:
I conjure thee to leave me, and be gone.

Give me the ring of mine you had at dinner,
Or for my Diamond the Chain you promised,
And I Will be gone sir, and not trouble you.

Some devils ask but the parings of ones nail, a rush, a hair, a drop of
blood, a pin, a nut, a cherriestone: but she more covetous, would have a chain:
Master be wise, and if you give it her, the devil will shake her Chain, and
fright us with it


I pray you sir my Ring, or else the Chain,
I hope you do not mean to cheat me so?

Auant thou witch: Come Dromio let us go.


Fly pride says the Pea-cocke, Mistress that you know.


Now out of doubt Antipholus is mad,
Else would he never so demean himself,
A Ring he has of mine worth forty Ducats,
And for the same he promised me a Chain,
Both one and other he denies me now:
The reason that I gather he is mad,
Besides this present instance of his rage,
Is a mad tale he told to day at dinner,
Of his own doors being shut against his entrance.
Belike his wife acquainted with his fits,
On purpose shut the doors against his way:
My way is now to hie home to his house,
And tell his wife, that being Lunaticke,
He rushed into my house, and took perforce
My Ring away. This course I fittest choose,
For forty Ducats is too much to loose.

Fear me not man, I will not break away,
I Will give thee ere I leave thee so much money
To warrant thee as I am rested for.
My wife is in a wayward mood to day,
And will not lightly trust the Messenger,
That I should be attached in Ephesus,
I tell you 'twill sound harshly in her ears.
Here comes my Man, I think he brings the money.
How now sir? Have you that I sent you for?

Here Is that I warrant you will pay them all.


But where is the Money?


Why sir, I gave the Money for the Rope.


Five hundred Ducats villain for a rope?


I Will serve you sir five hundred at the rate.


To what end did I bid thee hie thee home?


To a ropes end sir, and to that end am I returned.


And to that end sir, I will welcome you.


Good sir be patient.


Nay it is for me to be patient, I am in adversity.


Good now hold thy tongue.


Nay, rather persuade him to hold his hands.


Thou whoreson senseless Villain.


I would I were senseless sir, that I might not feel your blows.


Thou art sensible in nothing but blows, and so is an Ass.


I am an Ass indeed, you may prove it by my long ears. I have served him
from the hour of my Nativity to this instant, and have nothing at his hands
for my service but blows. When I am cold, he heates me with beating: when I am
warm, he cooles me with beating: I am waked with it when I sleep, raised with
it when I sit, driven out of doors with it when I go from home, welcomed home
with it when I return, nay I bear it on my shoulders, as a beggar wont her
brat: and I think when he has lamed me, I shall beg with it from door to
door


Come go along, my wife is coming yonder.


Mistress respice finem, respect your end, or rather the prophecy like the
Parrat, beware the ropes end


Will thou still talk?


How say you now? Is not your husband mad?


His inciuility confirms no less:
Good Doctor Pinch, you are a Coniurer,
Establish him in his true sense again,
And I will please you what you will demand.

Alas how fiery, and how sharp he looks.


Mark, how he trembles in his ecstasy.


Give me your hand, and let me feel your pulse.


There is my hand, and let it feel your ear.


I charge thee Satan, housed within this man,
To yield possession to my holy prayers,
And to thy state of darkness hie thee straight,
I conjure thee by all the Saints in heaven.

Peace doting wizard, peace; I am not mad.


Oh that thou were not, poor distressed soul.


You Minion you, are these your Customers?
Did this Companion with the saffron face
Revel and feast it at my house to day,
Whilst upon me the guilty doors were shut,
And I denied to enter in my house.

O husband, God does know you dined at home
Where would you had remained until this time,
Free from these slanders, and this open shame.

Dined at home? Thou Villain, what say thou?


Sir sooth to say, you did not dine at home.


Were not my doors locked up, and I shut out?


Perdie, your doors were locked, and you shut out.


And did not she her self revile me there?


Sans Fable, she her self reuil'd you there.


Did not her Kitchen maid rail, taunt, and scorn me?


Certis she did, the kitchen vestall scorned you.


And did not I in rage depart from thence?


In verity you did, my bones bears witness,
That since have felt the vigor of his rage.

Is It good to sooth him in these crontraries?


It is no shame, the fellow finds his vain,
And yielding to him, humors well his frenzy.

Thou have subborn'd the Goldsmith to arrest me.


Alas, I sent you Money to redeem you,
By Dromio here, who came in have for it.

Money by me? Heart and good will you might,
But surely Master not a ragge of Money.

Wentst not thou to her for a purse of Ducats.


He came to me, and I delivered it.


And I am witness with her that she did:


God and the Rope-maker bear me witness,
That I was sent for nothing but a rope.

Mistress, both Man and Master is possessed,
I know it by their pale and deadly looks,
They must be bound and laid in some dark room.

Say wherefore did thou lock me forth to day,
And why do thou deny the bag of gold?

I did not gentle husband lock thee forth.


And gentle Mr I received no gold:
But I confess sir, that we were locked out.

Dissembling Villain, thou speak false in both


Dissembling harlot, thou art false in all,
And art confederate with a damned pack,
To make a loathsome abject scorn of me:
But with these nails, I Will pluck out these false eyes,
That would behold in me this shameful sport.

Oh bind him, bind him, let him not come near me.


More company, the fiend is strong within him


Aye me poor man, how pale and wan he looks.


What will you murder me, thou Iailor thou?
I am thy prisoner, will thou suffer them to make a rescue?

Masters let him go: he is my prisoner, and you shall not have him.


Go bind this man, for he is frantic too.


What will thou do, thou peevish Officer?
Have thou delight to see a wretched man
Do outrage and displeasure to himself?

He is my prisoner, if I let him go,
The debt he owes will be required of me.

I will discharge thee ere I go from thee,
Bear me forthwith unto his Creditor,
And knowing how the debt grows I will pay it.
Good Master Doctor see him safe conuey'd
Home to my house, oh most unhappy day.

Oh most unhappy strumpet.


Master, I am here entered in bond for you.


Out on thee Villain, wherefore do thou mad me?


Will you be bound for nothing, be mad good Master, cry the devil.


God help poor souls, how idly do they talk.


Go bear him hence, sister go you with me:
Say now, whose suite is he arrested at?

One Angelo a Goldsmith, do you know him?


I know the man: what is the sum he owes?


Two hundred Ducats.


Say, how grows it due.


Due for a Chain your husband had of him.


He did bespeake a Chain for me, but had it not.


When as your husband all in rage to day.
Came to my house, and took away my Ring,
The Ring I saw upon his finger now,
Straight after did I meet him with a Chain.

It may be so, but I did never see it.
Come Iailor, bring me where the Goldsmith is,
I long to know the truth hereof at large.

God for thy mercy, they are loose again.


And come with naked swords,
Let Us call more help to have them bound again.

Away, they will kill us.


I see these Witches are afraid of swords.


She that would be your wife, now ran from you.


Come to the Centaur, fetch our stuff from thence:
I long that we were safe and sound aboard.

Faith stay here this night, they will surely do us no harm: you saw they
speak us fair, give us gold: me thinks they are such a gentle Nation, that
but for the Mountain of mad flesh that claims marriage of me, I could find in
my heart to stay here still, and turn Witch


I will not stay to night for all the Town,
Therefore away, to get our stuff aboard.

I am sorry Sir that I have hindered you,
But I protest he had the Chain of me,
Though most dishonestly he does deny it.

How is the man esteemed here in the City?


Of very reverent reputation sir,
Of credit infinite, highly beloved,
Second to none that lives here in the City:
His word might bear my wealth at any t^me.

Speak softly, yonder as I think he walks.


It Is so: and that self chain about his neck,
Which he forswore most monstrously to have.
Good sir draw near to me, I Will speak to him:
Signior Antipholus, I wonder much
That you would put me to this shame and trouble,
And not without some scandal to your self,
With circumstance and oaths, so to deny
This Chain, which now you wear so openly.
Beside the charge, the shame, imprisonment,
You have done wrong to this my honest friend,
Who but for staying on our Controversy,
Had hoisted sail, and put to sea to day:
This Chain you had of me, can you deny it?

I think I had, I never did deny it.


Yes that you did sir, and forswore it too.


Who heard me to deny it or forswear it?


These ears of mine thou know did hear thee:
Fie on thee wretch, it is pity that thou live
To walk where any honest men resort.

Thou art a Villain to impeach me thus,
I Will prove mine honor, and mine honesty
Against thee presently, if thou dare stand:

I dare and do defy thee for a villain.


Hold, hurt him not for God sake, he is mad,
Some get within him, take his sword away:
Bind Dromio too, and bear them to my house.

Run master run, for Gods sake take a house,
This is some Priorie, in, or we are spoiled.

Be quiet people, wherefore throng you hither?


To fetch my poor distracted husband hence,
Let us come in, that we may bind him fast,
And bear him home for his recovery.

I knew he was not in his perfect wits.


I am sorry now that I did draw on him.


How long has this possession held the man.


This week he has been heavy, sower sad,
And much different from the man he was:
But till this afternoon his passion
Never brake into extremity of rage.

Has he not lost much wealth by wrack of sea,
Buried some dear friend, has not else his eye
Strayed his affection in unlawful love,
A sin prevailing much in youthful men,
Who give their eyes the liberty of gazing.
Which of these sorrows is he subject too?

To none of these, except it be the last,
Namely, some love that drew him often from home.

You should for that have reprehended him.


Why so I did.


I but not rough enough.


As roughly as my modesty would let me.


Happily in private.


And in assemblies too.


I, but not enough.


It was the copy of our Conference.
In bed he slept not for my urging it,
At board he fed not for my urging it:
Alone, it was the subject of my Theme:
In company I often glanced it:
Still did I tell him, it was vilde and bad.

And thereof came it, that the man was mad.
The venom clamors of a jealous woman,
Poisons more deadly then a mad dogs tooth.
It seems his sleeps were hindered by thy railing,
And thereof comes it that his head is light.
Thou say his meat was sawc'd with thy vpbraidings,
Unquiet meals make ill digestions,
Thereof the raging fire of fever bred,
And what is a Fever, but a fit of madness?
Thou say his sports were hindered by thy bralles.
Sweet recreation barred, what does ensue
But moodie and dull melancholy,
Kinsman to grim and comfortless despair,
And at her heels a huge infectious troop
Of pale distemperatures, and foes to life?
In food, in sport, and life-preseruing rest
To be disturbed, would mad or man, or beast:
The consequence is then, thy jealous fits
Has scared thy husband from the use of wits.

She never reprehended him but mildely,
When he demeaned himself, rough, rude, and wildly,
Why bear you these rebukes, and answer not?

She did betray me to my own reproof,
Good people enter, and lay hold on him.

No, not a creature enters in my house.


Then let your servants bring my husband forth


Neither: he took this place for sanctuary,
And it shall privilege him from your hands,
Till I have brought him to his wits again,
Or loose my labor in assaying it.

I will attend my husband, be his nurse,
Diet his sickness, for it is my Office,
And will have no attorney but my self,
And therefore let me have him home with me.

Be patient, for I will not let him stir,
Till I have used the approved means I have,
With wholesome sirrups, drugges, and holy prayers
To make of him a formal man again:
It is a branch and parcel of mine oath,
A charitable duty of my order,
Therefore depart, and leave him here with me.

I will not hence, and leave my husband here:
And ill it does beseem your holiness
To separate the husband and the wife.

Be quiet and depart, thou shall not have him.


Complain unto the Duke of this indignity.


Come go, I will fall prostrate at his feet,
And never rise until my tears and prayers
Have won his grace to come in person hither,
And take perforce my husband from the Abbess.

By this I think the Dial points at five:
Anon IN me sure the Duke himself in person
Comes this way to the melancholy vale;
The place of depth, and sorry execution,
Behind the ditches of the Abbey here.

Upon what cause?


To see a reverent Siracusian Merchant,
Who put unluckily into this Bay
Against the Laws and Statutes of this Town,
Beheaded publicly for his offense.

See where they come, we will behold his death.


Kneel to the Duke before he pass the Abbey.


Yet once again proclaim it publicly,
If any friend will pay the sum for him,
He shall not die, so much we tender him.

Justice most sacred Duke against the Abbess.


She is a virtuous and a reverend Lady,
It cannot be that she has done thee wrong.

May it please your Grace, Antipholus my husband,
Who I made Lord of me, and all I had,
At your important Letters this ill day,
A most outrageous fit of madness took him:
That desp'rately he hurried through the street,
With him his bondsman, all as mad as he,
Doing displeasure to the Citizens,
By rushing in their houses: bearing thence
Rings, Jewels, any thing his rage did like.
Once did I get him bound, and sent him home,
Whilst to take order for the wrongs I went,
That here and there his fury had committed,
Anon I wot not, by what strong escape
He broke from those that had the guard of him,
And with his mad attendant and himself,
Each one with irefull passion, with drawn swords
Met us again, and madly bent on us
Chased us away: till raising of more aid
We came again to bind them: then they fled
Into this Abbey, whether we pursued them,
And here the Abbess shuts the gates on us,
And will not suffer us to fetch him out,
Nor send him forth, that we may bear him hence.
Therefore most gracious Duke with thy command,
Let him be brought forth, and borne hence for help.

Long since thy husband served me in my wars
And I to thee engaged a Princes word,
When thou did make him Master of thy bed,
To do him all the grace and good I could.
Go some of you, knock at the Abbey gate,
And bid the Lady Abbess come to me:
I will determine this before I stir.
Oh Mistress, Mistress, shift and save your self,
My Master and his man are both broke loose,
Beaten the Maids a-row, and bound the Doctor,
Whose beard they have sindg'd off with brands of fire,
And ever as it blazed, they threw on him
Great pailes of puddled mire to quench the hair;
My Mr preaches patience to him, and the while
His man with Cizers nickes him like a fool:
And sure (unless you send some present help)
Between them they will kill the Coniurer.

Peace fool, thy Master and his man are here,
And that is false thou do report to us.

Mistress, upon my life I tell you true,
I have not breathed almost since I did see it.
He cries for you, and vows if he can take you,
To scorch your face, and to disfigure you:
Hark, hark, I hear him Mistress: fly, be gone.

Come stand by me, fear nothing: guard with Halberds.


Ay me, it is my husband: witness you,
That he is borne about invisible,
Even now we housed him in the Abbey here.
And now he is there, past thought of humane reason.

Justice most gracious Duke, oh grant me justice,
Even for the service that long since I did thee,
When I be^rid thee in the wars, and took
Deep scarres to save thy life; even for the blood
That then I lost for thee, now grant me justice.

Unless the fear of death does make me door, I see my son Antipholus and
Dromio


Justice (sweet Prince) against yt Woman there:
She whom thou gave to me to be my wife;
That has abused and dishonored me,
Even in the strength and height of injury:
Beyond imagination is the wrong
That she this day has shameless thrown on me.

Discover how, and thou shall find me just.


This day (great Duke) she shut the doors upon me,
While she with Harlots feasted in my house.

A grievous fault: say woman, did thou so?


No my good Lord. My self, he, and my sister,
To day did dine together: so befall my soul,
As this is false he burdens me withal.

Nere may I look on day, nor sleep on night,
But she tells to your Highness simple truth.

O perjured woman! They are both forsworn,
In this the Madman justly charge them.

My Liege, I am advised what I say,
Neither disturbed with the effect of Wine,
Nor headie-rash prouoak'd with raging ire,
Albeit my wrongs might make one wiser mad.
This woman locked me out this day from dinner;
That Goldsmith there, were he not packed with her,
Could witness it: for he was with me then,
Who parted with me to go fetch a Chain,
Promising to bring it to the Porpentine,
Where Balthazar and I did dine together.
Our dinner done, and he not coming thither,
I went to seek him. In the street I met him,
And in his company that Gentleman.
There did this perjured Goldsmith swear me down,
That I this day of him received the Chain,
Which God he knows, I saw not. For the which,
He did arrest me with an Officer.
I did obey, and sent my Pesant home
For certain Ducats: he with none returned.
Then fairly I bespoke the Officer
To go in person with me to my house.
By 'th 'way, we met my wife, her sister, and a rabble more
Of vilde Confederates: Along with them
They brought one Pinch, a hungry leane-fac'd Villain;
A mere Anatomy, a Mountebanke,
A threadbare Iugler, and a Fortune Tellers,
A needy-hollow-ey'd-sharpe-looking-wretch;
A living dead man. This pernicious slave,
Forsooth took on him as a Coniurer:
And gazing in mine eyes, feeling my pulse,
And with no-face (as 'twere) out-facing me,
Cries out, I was possessed. Then altogether
They fell upon me, bound me, bore me thence,
And in a dark and dankish vault at home
There left me and my man, both bound together,
Till gnawing with my teeth my bonds in sunder,
I gained my freedom; and immediately
Ran hither to your Grace, whom I beseech
To give me ample satisfaction
For these deep shames, and great indignities.

My Lord, in truth, thus far I witness with him:
That he dined not at home, but was locked out.

But had he such a Chain of thee, or no?


He had my Lord, and when he ran in here,
These people saw the Chain about his neck.

Besides, I will be sworn these ears of mine,
Heard you confess you had the Chain of him,
After you first forswore it on the Mart,
And thereupon I drew my sword on you:
And then you fled into this Abbey here,
From whence I think you are come by Miracle.

I never came within these Abbey walls,
Nor ever did thou draw thy sword on me:
I never saw the Chain, so help me heaven:
And this is false you burden me withal.

Why what an intricate impeach is this?
I think you all have drunk of Circes cup:
If here you housed him, here he would have bin.
If he were mad, he would not plead so coldly:
You say he dined at home, the Goldsmith here
Denies that saying* Sir, what say you?

Sir he din'de with her there, at the Porpentine.


He did, and from my finger snacht that Ring.


It Is true (my Liege) this Ring I had of her.


Saw thou him enter at the Abbey here?


As sure (my Liege) as I do see your Grace.


Why this is strange: Go call the Abbess hither.
I think you are all mated, or stark mad.

Most mighty Duke, vouchsafe me speak a word:
Happily I see a friend will save my life,
And pay the sum that may deliver me.

Speak freely Siracusian what thou will.


Is not your name sir called Antipholus?
And is not that your bondsman Dromio?

Within this hour I was his bondsman sir,
But he I thank him gnawed in two my cords,
Now am I Dromio, and his man, unbound.

I am sure you both of you remember me.


Our selves we do remember sir by you:
For lately we were bound as you are now.
You are not Pinches patient, are you sir?

Why look you strange on me? you know me well.


I never saw you in my life till now.


Oh! grief has changed me since you saw me last,
And careful hours with times deformed hand,
Have written strange defeatures in my face:
But tell me yet, do thou not know my voice?

Neither.


Dromio, nor thou?


No trust me sir, nor I.


I am sure thou do?


I sir, but I am sure I do not, and whatsoever a man denies, you are now bound
to believe him


Not know my voice, oh times e^tremity
Have thou so cracked and splitted my poor tongue
In seven short years, that here my only son
Knows not my feeble key of untuned cares?
Though now this grained face of mine be hid
In sap-consuming Winters drizled snow,
And all the Conduits of my blood froze up:
Yet has my night of life some memory:
My wasting lamps some fading glimmer left;
My dull deaf ears a little use to hear:
All these old witnesses, I cannot err.
Tell me, thou art my son Antipholus.

I never saw my Father in my life.


But seven years since, in Siracusa boy
Thou know we parted, but perhaps my son,
Thou sham'st to acknowledge me in misery.

The Duke, and all that know me in the City,
Can witness with me that it is not so.
I never saw Siracusa in my life.

I tell thee Siracusian, twenty years
Have I bin Patron to Antipholus,
During which time, he never saw Siracusa:
I see thy age and dangers make thee dote.

Most mighty Duke, behold a man much wronged.


I see two husbands, or mine eyes deceive me.


One of these men is genius to the other:
And so of these, which is the natural man,
And which the spirit? Who deciphers them?

I Sir am Dromio, command him away.


I Sir am Dromio, pray let me stay.


Egeon art thou not? or else his ghost.


Oh my old Master, who has bound him here?


Who ever bound him, I will lose his bonds,
And gain a husband by his liberty:
Speak old Egeon, if thou be the man
That had a wife once called Aemilia,
That bore thee at a burden two fair sons?
Oh if thou be the same Egeon, speak:
And speak unto the same Aemilia.

Why here begins his Morning story right:
These two Antipholus, these two so like,
And these two Dromio's, one in semblance:
Besides her urging of her wrack at sea,
These are the parents to these children,
Which accidentally are met together.

If I dream not, thou art Aemilia,
If thou art she, tell me, where is that son
That floated with thee on the fatal rafte.

By men of Epidamium, he, and I,
And the twin Dromio, all were taken up;
But by and by, rude Fishermen of Corinth
By force took Dromio, and my son from them,
And me they left with those of Epidamium.
What then became of them, I cannot tell:
I, to this fortune that you see me in.

Antipholus thou came from Corinth first.


No sir, not I, I came from Siracuse.


Stay, stand apart, I know not which is which.


I came from Corinth my most gracious Lord


And I with him.


Brought to this Town by that most famous Warrior,
Duke Menaphon, your most renowned Uncle.

Which of you two did dine with me to day?


I, gentle Mistress.


And are not you my husband?


No, I say nay to that.


And so do I, yet did she call me so:
And this fair Gentlewoman her sister here
Did call me brother. What I told you then,
I hope I shall have leisure to make good,
If this be not a dream I see and hear.

That is the Chain sir, which you had of me.


I think it be sir, I deny it not.


And you sir for this Chain arrested me.


I think I did sir, I deny it not.


I sent you money sir to be your bail
By Dromio, but I think he brought it not.

No, none by me.


This purse of Ducats I received from you,
And Dromio my man did bring them me:
I see we still did meet each others man,
And I was taken for him, and he for me,
And thereupon these errors are arose.

These Ducats pawn I for my father here.


It shall not need, thy father has his life.


Sir I must have that Diamond from you.


There take it, and much thanks for my good cheer.


Renowned Duke, vouchsafe to take the pains
To go with us into the Abbey here,
And hear at large discoursed all our fortunes,
And all that are assembled in this place:
That by this simpathized one days error
Have suffered wrong. Go, keep us company,
And we shall make full satisfaction.
Thirty three years have I but gone in travail
Of you my sons, and till this present hour
My heavy burden are delivered:
The Duke my husband, and my children both,
And you the Kalenders of their Nativity,
Go to a Gossips feast, and go with me,
After so long grief such Nativity.

With all my heart, I Will Gossip at this feast.


Mast* shall I fetch your stuff from shipbord?


Dromio, what stuff of mine have thou imbarkt


Your goods that lay at host sir in the Centaur.


He speaks to me, I am your master Dromio.
Come go with us, we will look to that anon,
Embrace thy brother there, rejoice with him.

There is a fat friend at your masters house,
That kitchin'd me for you to day at dinner:
She now shall be my sister, not my wife.

Me thinks you are my glass, and not my brother:
I see by you, I am a sweet-fac'd youth,
Will you walk in to see their gossipping?

Not I sir, you are my elder.


That Is a question, how shall we try it.


We Will draw Cuts for the Signior, till then, lead thou first.


Nay then thus:
We came into the world like brother and brother:
And now let us go hand in hand, not one before another.


