BEfore we proceed any further, hear me speak.


Speak, speak.


You are all resolved rather to die then to famish?


Resolved, resolved.


First you know, Caius Martius is chief enemy to the people.


We know it, we know it.


Let us kill him, and we will have Corn at our own price. Is It a Verdict?


No more talking on it; Let it be done, away, away


One word, good Citizens.


We are accounted poor Citizens, the Patricians good: what Authority surfets
one, would relieve us. If they would yield us but the superfluity while it
were wholesome, we might guess they relieved us humanely: But they think we
are too dear, the leanness that afflicts us, the object of our misery, is as
an inuentory to particularize their abundance, our sufferance is a gain to
them. Let us revenge this with our Pikes, ere we become Rakes. For the Gods
know, I speak this in hunger for Bread, not in thirst for Revenge


Would you proceed especially against Caius Martius.


Against him first: He Is a very dog to the Commonalty.


Consider you what Services he has done for his Country?


Very well, and could be content to give him good report for it, but that he
pays himself with being proud


Nay, but speak not maliciously.


I say unto you, what he has done Famouslie, he did it to that end: though
soft conscienc'd men can be content to say it was for his Country, he did it
to please his Mother and to be partly proud, which he is, even to the altitude
of his virtue


What he cannot help in his Nature, you account a Vice in him: You must in no
way say he is covetous


If I must not, I need not be barren of Accusations he has faults (with
surplus) to tire in repetition

What showts are these? The other side a' th City is risen: why stay we prating
here? To the Capitol


Come, come.


Soft, who comes here?


Worthy Menenius Agrippa, one that has always loved the people.


He Is one honest enough, would all the rest were so.


What work's my Countrymen in hand?
Where go you with Bats and Clubs? The matter
Speak I pray you.

Our business is not unknown to the Senate, they have had inkling this fortnight
what we intend to do, with now we will show em in deeds: they say poor Suitors have
strong breaths, they shall know we have strong arms too


Why Masters, my good Friends, mine honest Neighbors, will you undo your
selves


We cannot Sir, we are undone already.


I tell you Friends, most charitable care
Have the Patricians of you for your wants.
Your suffering in this dearth, you may as well
Strike at the Heaven with your staves, as lift them
Against the Roman State, whose course will on
The way it takes: cracking ten thousand Curbes
Of more strong link assunder, then can ever
Appear in your impediment. For the Dearth,
The Gods, not the Patricians make it, and
Your knees to them (not arms) must help. Alack,
You are transported by Calamity
Thither, where more attends you, and you slander
The Helmes of th State; who care for you like Fathers,
When you curse them, as Enemies.

Care for us? True indeed, they nere cared for us yet. Suffer us to famish, and
their Storehouses crammed with Grain: Make Edicts for Usury, to support
Usurers; repeal daily any wholesome Act established against the rich, and
provide more piercing Statutes daily, to chain up and restrain the poor. If
the Wars eat us not up, they will; and there is all the love they bear us


Either you must
Confess your selves wondrous Malicious,
Or be accused of Folly. I shall tell you
A pretty Tale, it may be you have heard it,
But since it serves my purpose, I will venture
To scale't a little more.

Well,
I Will hear it Sir: yet you must not think
To fobbe off our disgrace with a tale:
But and't please you deliver.

There was a time, when all the bodies members
Rebelled against the Belly; thus accused it:
That only like a Gulf it did remain
IN th amidst a the body, idle and inactive,
Still cubbording the Viand, never bearing
Like labor with the rest, where the other Instruments
Did see, and hear, devise, instruct, walk, feel,
And mutually participate, did minister
Unto the appetite; and affection common
Of the whole body, the Belly answered.

Well sir, what answer made the Belly.


Sir, I shall tell you with a kind of Smile,
Which never came from the Lungs, but even thus:
For look you I may make the belly Smile,
As well as speak, it taintingly replied
To' the discontented Members, the mutinous parts
That envied his receite: even so most fitly,
As you malign our Senators, for that
They are not such as you.

Your Bellies answer: What
The Kingly crowned head, the vigilant eye,
The Counsailor Heart, the Arm our Soldier,
Our Steed the Leg, the Tongue our Trumpeter,
With other Muniments and petty helps
In this our Fabric, if that they --

What then? Foreme, this Fellow speaks.
What then? What then?

Should by the Cormorant belly be restrained,
Who is the sink a the body.

Well, what then?


The former Agents, if they did complain,
What could the Belly answer?

I will tell you,
If you will bestow a small (of what you have little)
Patience awhile; you'st hear the Bellies answer.

Y' are long about it.


Note me this good Friend;
Your most grave Belly was deliberate,
Not rash like his Accusers, and thus answered.
True is it my Incorporate Friends (quoth he)
That I receive the general Food at first
Which you do live upon: and fit it is,
Because I am the Storehouse, and the Shop
Of the whole Body. But, if you do remember,
I send it through the Rivers of your blood
Even to the Court, the Heart, to the seat of the Brain,
And through the Crankes and Offices of man,
The strongest Nerves, and small inferior Veins
From me receive that natural competencie
Whereby they live. And though that all at once
(You my good Friends, this says the Belly) mark me.

I sir, well, well.


Though all at once, cannot
See what I do deliver out to each,
Yet I can make my Awdit up, that all
From me do back receive the Flower of all,
And leave me but the Bran. What say you to it?

It was an answer, how apply you this?


The Senators of Rome, are this good Belly,
And you the mutinous Members: For examine
Their Counsels, and their Cares; digest things rightly,
Touching the Weal a' th Common, you shall find
No public benefit which you receive
But it proceeds, or comes from them to you,
And no way from your selves. What do you think?
You, the great Toe of this Assembly?

I the great Toe? Why the great Toe?


For that being one of th lowest, basest, poorest
Of this most wise Rebellion, thou go foremost:
Thou Rascal, that art worst in blood to run,
Lead'st first to win some vantage.
But make you ready your stiff bats and clubs,
Rome, and her Rats, are at the point of battle,
The one side must have bail.
Hayle, Noble Martius.

Thanks. What Is the matter you dissentious rogues
That rubbing the poor Itch of your Opinion,
Make your selves Scabs.

We have ever your good word.


He that will give good words to thee, will flatter
Beneath abhorring. What would you have, you Curres,
That like nor Peace, nor War? The one affrights you,
The other makes you proud. He that trusts to you,
Where he should find you Lions, finds you Hares:
Where Foxes, Geese you are: No surer, no,
Then is the coal of fire upon the Ice,
Or Hailstone in the Sun. Your Virtue is,
To make him worthy, whose offense subdues him,
And curse that Justice did it. Who deserves Greatness,
Deserves your Hate: and your Affections are
A sickmans Appetite; who desires most that
Which would increase his evil. He that depends
Upon your favors, swimmes with finnes of Lead,
And hewes down Oaks, with rushes. Hang ye: trust ye?
With every Minute you do change a Mind,
And call him Noble, that was now your Hate:
Him vilde, that was your Garland. What Is the matter,
That in these several places of the City,
You cry against the Noble Senate, who
(Under the Gods) keep you in awe, which else
Would feed on one another? What Is their seeking?

For Corn at their own rates, whereof they say
The City is well stored.

Hang 'em: They say?
They Will sit by the fire, and presume to know
What Is done in th Capitol: Who Is like to rise,
Who thriues, and who declines: Side factions, and give out
Coniecturall Marriages, making parties strong*
And feebling such as stand not in their liking,
Below their cobled Shoes. They say there is grain enough?
Would the Nobility lay aside their ruth,
And let me use my Sword, I Would make a Quarrie
With thousands of these quartered slaves, as high
As I could pick my Lance.

Nay these are almost thoroughly persuaded:
For though abundantly they lack discretion
Yet are they passing Cowardly. But I beseech you,
What says the other Troop?

They are dissolved: Hang em;
They said they were an hungry, sighed forth Proverbs
That Hunger-broke stone walls: that dogs must eat
That meat was made for mouths. That the gods sent not
Corn for the Richmen only: With these shreds
They vented their Complainings, which being answered
And a petition granted them, a strange one,
To break the heart of generosity,
And make bold power look pale, they threw their caps
As they would hang them on the horns a' th Moon,
Shooting their Emulation.

What is granted them?


Five Tribunes to defend their vulgar wisdom^
Of their own choice. One's Iunius Brutus,
Sicinius Velutus, and I know not. Sdeath,
The rabble should have first vnroo'ft the City
Ere so preuayl'd with me; it will in time
Win upon power, and throw forth greater Theames
For Insurrections arguing.

This is strange.


Go get you home you Fragments.


Where Is Caius Martius?


Here: what is the matter?


The news is sir, the Volcies are in Arms.


I am glad on it, then we shall ha means to vent
Our mustie superfluity. See our best Elders.

Martius it is true, that you have lately told us,
The Volces are in Arms.

They have a Leader,
Tullus Auffidius that will put you to it:
I sin in envying his Nobility:
And were I any thing but what I am,
I would wish me only he.

You have fought together?


Were half to half the world by the ears, and he upon my party, I Would revolt
to make
Only my wars with him. He is a Lion
That I am proud to hunt.

Then worthy Martius,
Attend upon Cominius to these Wars.

It is your former promise.


Sir it is,
And I am constant: Titus Lucius, thou
Shall see me once more strike at Tullus face.
What art thou stiff? Stand'st out?

No Caius Martius,
I Will lean upon one Crutch, and fight with the other,
Ere stay behind this Business.

Oh true-bred.


Your Company to' the Capitol, where I know
Our greatest Friends attend us.

Lead you on: Follow Cominius, we must follow you, right worthy you Priority.


Noble Martius.


Hence to your homes, be gone.


Nay let them follow,
The Volces have much Corn: take these Rats thither,
To gnaw their Garners. Worshipful Mutiners,
Your valor puts well forth: Pray follow.

Was ever man so proud as is this Martius?


He has no equal.


When we were chosen Tribunes for the people.


Marked you his lip and eyes.


Nay, but his taunts.


Being moved, he will not spare to gird the Gods.


Bemocke the modest Moon.


The present Wars devour him, he is grown
Too proud to be so valiant.

Such a Nature, tickled with good success, disdaines the shadow which he
treads on at noone, but I do wonder, his insolence can brook to be commanded
under Cominius


Fame, at the which he aims,
In whom already he is well graced, cannot
Better be held, nor more attained then by
A place below the first: for what miscarries
Shall be the Generals fault, though he perform
To the utmost of a man, and giddy censure
Will then cry out of Martius: Oh, if he
Had borne the business.

Besides, if things go well,
Opinion that so sticks on Martius, shall
Of his demerits rob Cominius.

Come: half all Cominius Honors are to Martius
Though Martius earned them not: and all his faults
To Martius shall be Honors, though indeed
In ought he merit not.

Let Us hence, and hear
How the dispatch is made, and in what fashion
More then his singularity, he goes
Upon this present Action.

Let Us along.


So, your opinion is Auffidius,
That they of Rome are entered in our Counsels,
And know how we proceed,

Is it not yours?
What ever have bin thought one in this State
That could be brought to bodily act, ere Rome
Had circumuention: it is not four days gone
Since I heard thence, these are the words, I think
I have the Letter here: yes, here it is;
They have pressed a Power, but it is not known
Whether for East or West: the Dearth is great,
The people Mutinous: And it is ^umour'd,
Cominius, Martius your old Enemy
(Who is of Rome worse hated then of you)
And Titus Lartius, a most valiant Roman,
These three lead on this Preparation
Whether it is bent: most likely, it is for you:
Consider of it.

Our Armie's in the Field:
We never yet made doubt but Rome was ready
To answer us.

Nor did you think it folly,
To keep your great pretenses vayl'd, till when
They needs must show themselves, which in the hatching
It seemed appeared to Rome. By the discovery,
We shall be shortened in our aim, which was
To take in many Towns, ere (almost) Rome
Should know we were a-foot.

Noble Auffidius,
Take your Commission, hye you to your Bands,
Let us alone to guard Corioles
If they set down before's: for the remove
Bring up your Army: but (I think) you will find
The have not prepared for us.

O doubt not that,
I speak from Certainties. Nay more,
Some parcels of their Power are forth already,
And only hitherward. I leave your Honors.
If we, and Caius Martius chance to meet,
It Is sworn between us, we shall ever strike
Till one can do no more.

The Gods assist you.


And keep your Honors safe.


Farewell.


Farewell.


Farewell.


I pray you daughter sing, or express your self in a more comfortable sort:
If my Son were my Husband, I should freelier rejoice in that absence wherein
he won Honor, then in the embracements of his Bed, where he would show most
love. When yet he was but tender-bodied, and the only Son of my womb; when
youth with comeliness plucked all gaze his way; when for a day of Kings
entreaties, a Mother should not sell him an hour from her beholding; I
considering how Honor would become such a person, that it was no better then
Picture-like to hang by the wall, if renown made it not stir, was pleased to
let him seek danger, where he was like to find fame: To a cruel War I sent
him, from whence he returned, his brows bound with Oak. I tell thee Daughter,
I sprang not more in joy at first hearing he was a Man-child, then now in first
seeing he had proved himself a man


But had he died in the Business Madame, how then?


Then his good report should have been my Son, I therein would have found
issue. Hear me profess sincerely, had I a dozen sons each in my love alike,
and none less dear then thine, and my good Martius, I had rather had eleven
dye Nobly for their Country, then one voluptuously surfeit out of Action


Madam, the Lady Valeria is come to visit you.


Beseech you give me leave to retire my self.


Indeed you shall not:
Me thinks, I hear hither your Husbands Drum:
See him pluck Auffidius down by the hair:
(As children from a Bear) the Volces shunning him:
Me thinks I see him stamp thus, and call thus,
Come on you Cowards, you were got in fear
Though you were borne in Rome; his bloody brow
With his mail'd hand, then wiping, forth he goes
Like to a Harvest man, that task'd to mow
Or all, or loose his hyre.

His bloody Brow? Oh Jupiter, no blood.


Away you Fool; it more becomes a man
Then gilt his Trophe. The breasts of Hecuba
When she did suckle Hector, looked not louelier
Then Hectors forhead, when it spit forth blood
At Grecian sword. Contenning, tell Valeria
We are fit to bid her welcome.

Heavens bless my Lord from fell Auffidius.


He Will beat Auffidius head below his knee,
And tread upon his neck.

My Ladies both good day to you.


Sweet Madam.


I am glad to see your Ladyship.


How do you both? You are manifest housekeepers. What are you sowing here? A
fine spotte in good faith. How does your little Son


I thank your Lady-ship: Well good Madam.


He had rather see the swords, and hear a Drum, then look upon his
Schoolmaster


A my word the Fathers Son: I Will swear it is a very pretty boy. A my troth, I
looked upon him a Wensday half an hour together: has such a confirmed
countenance. I saw him run after a gilded Butterfly, and when he caught it, he
let it go again, and after it again, and over and over he comes, and up
again: caught it again: or whether his fall enraged him, or how 'twas, he did
so set his teeth, and tear it. Oh, I warrant how he mammockt it


One on's Fathers moods.


Indeed la, it is a Noble child.


A Crack Madam.


Come, lay aside your stitchery, I must have you play the idle Huswife with me
this afternoon


No (good Madam)
I will not out of doors.

Not out of doors?


She shall, she shall.


Indeed no, by your patience; I Will not over the threshold, till my Lord return
from the Wars


Fie, you confine your self most unreasonably:
Come, you must go visit the good Lady that lies in.

I will wish her speedy strength, and visit her with my prayers: but I cannot
go thither


Why I pray you.


It Is not to save labor, nor that I want love.


You would be another Penelope: yet they say, all the yearne she spun in
Ulysses absence, did but fill Athica full of Mothes. Come, I would your
Cambrick were sensible as your finger, that you might leave pricking it for
pity. Come you shall go with us


No good Madam, pardon me, indeed I will not forth.


In truth la go with me, and I Will tell you excellent news of your Husband.


Oh good Madam, there can be none yet.


Verily I do not jest with you: there came news from him last night.


Indeed Madam.


In earnest it is true; I heard a Senator speak it. Thus it is: the Volcies
have an Army forth, against who^ Cominius the General is gone, with one part
of our Roman power. Your Lord, and Titus Lartius, are set down before their
City Carioles, they nothing doubt prevailing, and to make it brief Wars.
This is true on mine Honor, and so I pray go with us


Give me excuse good Madame, I will obey you in every thing hereafter.


Let her alone Lady, as she is now:
She will but disease our better mirth.

In troth I think she would:
Fare you well then. Come good sweet Lady.
Prithee Virgilia turn thy solemness out a door,
And go along with us.

No
At a word Madam; Indeed I must not,
I wish you much mirth.

Well, then farewell.


Yonder comes News:
A Wager they have met.

My horse to yours, no.


It Is done.


Agreed.


Say, has our General met the Enemy?


They lie in view, but have not spoke as yet.


So, the good Horse is mine.


I Will buy him of you.


No, I Will nor sell, nor give him: Lend you him I will
For half a hundred years: Summon the Town.

How far off lie these Armies?


Within this mile and half.


Then shall we hear their Larum, and they Ours.
Now Mars, I prithee make us quick in work,
That we with smoking swords may march from hence
To help our fielded Friends. Come, blow thy blast.
Tullus Auffidious, is he within your Walls?

No, nor a man that fears you less then he,
That Is lesser then a little:
Hark, our Drums
Are bringing forth our youth: We Will break our Walls
Rather then they shall pound us up our Gates,
Which yet seem shut, we have but pined with Rushes,
They Will open of themselves. Hark you, far off
There is Auffidious. List what work he makes
Among'st your cloven Army.

Oh they are at it.


Their noise be our instruction. Ladders hoa.


They fear us not, but issue forth their City.
Now put your Shields before your hearts, and fight
With hearts more proof then Shields.
Advance brave Titus,
They do disdain us much beyond our Thoughts,
which makes me sweat with wrath. Come on my fellows
He that retires, I Will take him for a Volce,
And he shall feel mine edge.

All the contagion of the South, light on you,
You Shames of Rome: you Heard of Byles and Plagues
Plaster you over, that you may be abhorred
Farther then seen, and one infect another
Against the Wind a mile: you souls of Geese,
That bear the shapes of men, how have you run
From Slaves, that Apes would beat; Pluto and Hell,
All hurt behind, backs red, and faces pale
With flight and agued fear, mend and charge home,
Or by the fires of heaven, I Will leave the Foe,
And make my Wars on you: Look to it: Come on,
If you will stand fast, we will beat them to their Wives,
As they us to our Trenches follows.
So, now the gates are open: now prove good Seconds,
It Is for the followers Fortune, widens them,
Not for the flyers: Mark me, and do the like.

Foole-hardinesse, not I.


Nor I.


See they have shut him in.


To the pot I warrant him.


What is become of Martius?


Slain (Sir) doubtless.


Following the Flyers at the very heels,
With them he enters: who upon the sudden
Clapped to their Gates, he is himself alone,
To answer all the City.

Oh Noble Fellow!
Who sensibly out-dares his senseless Sword,
And when it bows, stand'st up: Thou art left Martius,
A Carbuncle entire: as big as thou art
Wear not so rich a Jewel. Thou was it a Soldier
Even to Calves wish, not fierce and terrible
Only in strokes, but with thy grim looks, and
The Thunder-like percussion of thy sounds
Thou made thine enemies shake, as if the World
Were Feauorous, and did tremble.

Look Sir.


O it is Martius.
Let Us fetch him off, or make remain alike.

This will I carry to Rome.


And I this.


A Murrain on it, I took this for Silver.


See here these mouers, that do prize their hours
At a cracked Drachme: Cushions, Leaden Spoones,
Irons of a Doit, Dublets that Hangmen would
Bury with those that wore them. These base slaves,
Ere yet the fight be done, pack up, down with them.
And hark, what noise the General makes: To him
There is the man of my souls hate, Auffidious,
Piercing our Romans: Then Valiant Titus take
Convenient Numbers to make good the City,
Whilst I with those that have the spirit, will haste
To help Cominius.

Worthy Sir, thou bleed'st,
Thy exercise has bin too violent,
For a second course of Fight.

Sir, praise me not:
My work has yet not warmed me. Fare you well:
The blood I drop, is rather Physical
Then dangerous to me: To Auffidious thus, I will appear and fight.

Now the fair Goddess Fortune,
Fall deep in love with thee, and her great charms
Misguide thy Opposers swords, Bold Gentleman:
Prosperity be thy Page.

Thy Friend no less,
Then those she places highest: So farewell.

Thou worthiest Martius,
Go sound thy Trumpet in the Market place,
Call thither all the Officers a' the Town,
Where they shall know our mind. Away.

Breath you my friends, well fought, we are come off,
Like Romans, neither foolish in our stands,
Nor Cowardly in retire: Believe me Sirs,
We shall be charged again. Whiles we have struck
By Interims and conueying gusts, we have heard
The Charges of our Friends. The Roman Gods,
Lead their successes, as we wish our own,
That both our powers, with smiling Fronts encountering,
May give you thankful Sacrifice. Thy News?

The Citizens of Corioles have issued,
And given to Lartius and to Martius Battle:
I saw our party to their Trenches driven,
And then I came away.

Though thou speak truth,
Me thinks thou speak not well. How long is it since?

Above an hour, my Lord.


It Is not a mile: briefly we heard their drums.
How could thou in a mile confound an hour,
And bring thy News so late?

Spies of the Volces
Held me in chase, that I was forced to wheel
Three or four miles about, else had I sir
Half an hour since brought my report.

Whose yonder,
That does appear as he were Flead? O Gods,
He has the stamp of Martius, and I have
Before time seen him thus.

Come I too late?


The Shepherd knows not Thunder from a Taber,
More then I know the sound of Martius Tongue
From every meaner man.

Come I too late?


I, if you come not in the blood of others,
But mantled in your own.

Oh! let me clip ye
In Arms as sound, as when I wooed in heart;
As merry, as when our Nuptial day was done,
And Tapers burnt to Bedward.

Flower of Warriors, how is it with Titus Lartius?


As with a man busied about Decrees:
Condemning some to death, and some to exile,
Ransoming him, or pitying, threatening the other;
Holding Corioles in the name of Rome,
Even like a fawning Greyhound in the Leash,
To let him slip at will.

Where is that Slave
Which told me they had beat you to your Trenches?
Where is he? Call him hither.

Let him alone,
He did inform the truth: but for our Gentlemen,
The common file, (a plague-Tribunes for them)
The Mouse never shunned the Cat, as they did budge
From Rascals worse then they.

But how prevailed you?


Will the time serve to tell, I do not think:
Where is the enemy? Are you Lords a' th Field?
If not, why cease you till you are so?

Martius, we have at disadvantage fought,
And did retire to win our purpose.

How lies their Battle? Know you on wc side
They have placed their men of trust?

As I guess Martius,
Their Bands in th Vaward are the Ancients
Of their best trust: Over them Auffidious,
Their very heart of Hope.

I do beseech you,
By all the Battles wherein we have fought,
By the Blood we have shed together,
By the Vows we have made
To endure Friends, that you directly set me
Against Affidious, and his Antiats,
And that you not delay the present (but
Filling the air with Swords advanced) and Darts,
We prove this very hour.

Though I could wish,
You were conducted to a gentle Bath,
And Balmes applied to you, yet dare I never
Deny your asking, take your choice of those
That best can aid your action.

Those are they
That most are willing; if any such be here,
(As it were sin to doubt) that love this painting
Wherein you see me smeared, if any fear
Lessen his person, then an ill report:
If any think, brave death out-weighes bad life,
And that his Countries deerer then himself,
Let him alone: Or so many so minded,
Wave thus to express his disposition,
And follow Martius.
Oh me alone, make you a sword of me:
If these shows be not outward, which of you
But is four Volces? None of you, but is
Able to bear against the great Auffidious
A Shield, as hard as his. A certain number
(Though thanks to all) must I select from all:
The rest shall bear the business in some other fight
(As cause will be obeyed:) please you to March,
And four shall quickly draw out my Command,
Which men are best inclined.

March on my Fellows:
Make good this ostentation, and you shall
Divide in all, with us.

So, let the Ports be guarded; keep your Duties
As I have set them down. If I do send, dispatch
Those Centuries to our aid, the rest will serve
For a short holding, if we loose the Field,
We cannot keep the Town.

Fear not our care Sir.


Hence; and shut your gates vpon's:
Our Guider come, to the Roman Gampe conduct us.

I Will fight with none but thee, for I do hate thee
Worse then a Promise-breaker.

We hate alike:
Not Affricke ownes a Serpent I abhor
More then thy Fame and Envy: Fix thy foot.

Let the first Budger dye the others Slave,
And the Gods doom him after.

If I fly Martius, hollow me like a Hare.


Within these three hours Tullus
Alone I fought in your Corioles walls,
And made what work I pleased: It Is not my blood,
Wherein thou see me maskt, for thy Revenge
Wrench up thy power to the highest.

Were thou the Hector,
That was the whip of your bragged Progeny,
Thou should not escape me here.
Officious and not valiant, you have shamed me
In your condemned Seconds.

If I should tell thee over this thy days Work,
Thou't not believe thy deeds: but I Will report it,
Where Senators shall mingle tears with smiles,
Where great Patricians shall attend, and shrug,
IN the end admire: where Ladies shall be frighted,
And gladly quaked, hear more: where the dull Tribunes,
That with the fustie Plebeans, hate thine Honors,
Shall say against their hearts, We thank the Gods
Our Rome has such a Soldier.
Yet came thou to a Morsel of this Feast,
Having fully dined before.

Oh General:
Here is the Steed, we the Caparison:
Had thou beheld --

Pray now, no more:
My Mother, who has a Charter to extol her Blood,
When she does praise me, grieves me:
I have done as you have done, that is what I can,
Induced as you have been, that is for my Country:
He that has but effected his good will,
Has ouerta'ne mine Act.

You shall not be the Grave of your deserving,
Rome must know the value of her own:
'Twere a Concealment worse then a Theft,
No less then a Traducement,
To hide your doings, and to silence that,
Which to the spire, and top of praises vouched,
Would seem but modest: therefore I beseech you,
In sign of what you are, not to reward
What you have done, before our Army hear me.

I have some Wounds upon me, and they smart
To hear themselves remembered.

Should they not:
Well might they fester against Ingratitude,
And tent themselves with death: of all the Horses,
Whereof we have taken good, and good store of all,
The Treasure in this field achieved, and City,
We render you the Tenth, to be taken forth,
Before the common distribution,
At your only choice.

I thank you General:
But cannot make my heart consent to take
A Bribe, to pay my Sword: I do refuse it,
And stand upon my common part with those,
That have beheld the doing.

May these same Instruments, which you profane,
Never sound more: when Drums and Trumpets shall
IN the field prove flatterers, let Courts and Cities be
Made all of false-fac'd soothing:
When Steel grows soft, as the Phrasites Silk,
Let him be made an Ouerture for the Wars:
No more I say, for that I have not washed
My Nose that bled, or foiled some debile Wretch,
Which without note, here is many else have done,
You shoot me forth in acclamations hyperbolicall,
As if I loved my little should be dieted
In praises, sawc'st with Lies.

Too modest are you:
More cruel to your good report, then grateful
To us, that give you truly: by your patience,
If against your self you be incensed, we will put you
(Like one that means his proper harm) in Manacles,
Then reason safely with you: Therefore be it known,
As to us, to all the World, That Caius Martius
Wears this Wars Garland: in token of the which,
My Noble Steed, known to the Camp, I give him,
With all his trim belonging; and from this time,
For what he did before Corioles, call him,
With all the applause and Clamor of the Host,

Bear the addition Nobly ever?


I will go wash:
And when my Face is fair, you shall perceive
Whether I blush, or no: howbeit, I thank you,
I mean to stride your Steed, and at all times
To vnder-crest your good Addition,
To the fairness of my power.

So, to our Tent:
Where ere we do repose us, we will write
To Rome of our success: you Titus Lartius
Must to Corioles back, send us to Rome
The best, with whom we may articulate,
For their own good, and ours.

I shall, my Lord.


The Gods begin to mock me:
I that now refused most Princely gifts,
Am bound to beg of my Lord General.

Take It, it is yours: what is it?


I sometime lay here in Corioles,
At a poor man's house: he used me kindly,
He cried to me: I saw him Prisoner:
But then Auffidius was within my view,
And Wrath o're-whelm'd my pity: I request you
To give my poor Host freedom.

Oh well begged:
Were he the Butcher of my Son, he should
Be free, as is the Wind: deliver him, Titus.

Martius, his Name.


By Jupiter forgot:
I am weary, yea my memory is tired:
Have we no Wine here?

Go we to our Tent:
The blood upon your Visage dryes, it is time
It should be looked too: come.

The Town is taken.


'Twill be delivered back on good Condition.


Condition?
I would I were a Roman, for I cannot.
Being a Volce, be that I am. Condition?
What good Condition can a Treaty find
IN the part that is at mercy? five times, Martius,
I have fought with thee; so often have thou beat me:
And would do so, I think, should we encounter
As often as we eat. By the Elements,
If ere again I meet him beard to beard,
He Is mine, or I am his: Mine Emulation
Has not that Honor in it it had: For where
I thought to crush him in an equal Force,
True Sword to Sword: I Will potche at him some way,
Or Wrath, or Craft may get him.

He Is the devil.


Bolder, though not so subtle: my valors poisoned,
With only suffering stain by him: for him
Shall fly out of it self, nor sleep, nor sanctuary,
Being naked, sick; nor Phane, nor Capitol,
The Prayers of Priests, nor times of Sacrifice:
Embarquements all of Fury, shall lift up
Their rotten Privilege, and Custom against
My hate to Martius. Where I find him, were it
At home, upon my Brothers Guard, even there
Against the hospitable Canon, would I
Wash my fierce hand in's heart. Go you to the City,
Learn how it is held, and what they are that must
Be Hostages for Rome.

Will not you go?


I am attended at the Cyprus grove* I pray you
('It Is South the City Mils) bring me word thither
How the world goes: that to the pace of it
I may spur on my journey.

I shall sir.


The Agurer tells me, we shall have News to night.


Good or bad?


Not according to the prayer of the people, for they love not Martius.


Nature teaches Beasts to know their Friends.


Pray you, who does the Wolf love?


The Lamb.


I, to devour him, as the hungry Plebeians would the Noble Martius.


He Is a Lamb indeed, that baes like a Bear.


He Is a Bear indeed, that lives like a Lamb.
You two are old men, tell me one thing that I shall ask you.

Well sir.


In what enormity is Martius poor in, that you two have not in abundance?


He Is poor in no one fault, but stored withal.


Especially in Pride.


And topping all others in boasting.


This is strange now: Do you two know, how you are censured here in the City,
I mean of us a' the right hand File, do you


Why? ho ware we censured?


Because you talk of Pride now, will you not be angry.


Well, well sir, well.


Why it is no great matter: for a very little thief of Occasion, will rob you
of a great deal of Patience: Give your dispositions the reins, and be angry
at your pleasures (at the least) if you take it as a pleasure to you, in being
so: you blame Martius for being proud


We do it not alone, sir.


I know you can do very little alone, for your helps are many, or else your
actions would grow wondrous single: your abilities are to Infant-like, for
doing much alone. You talk of Pride: Oh, that you could turn your eyes toward
the Napes of your necks, and make but an Interior survey of your good selves.
Oh that you could


What then sir?


Why then you should discover a brace of vnmeriting, proud, violent, testie
Magistrates (alias Fools) as any in Rome


Menenius, you are known well enough too.


I am known to be a humorous Patritian, and one that loves a cup of hot Wine,
with not a drop of alaying Tiber in it: Said, to be something imperfect in
favoring the first complaint, hasty and Tinder-like upon, to triuiall motion:
One, that conuerses more with the Buttocke of the night, then with the forhead
of the morning. What I think, I utter, and spend my malice in my breath.
Meeting two such Weals men as you are (I cannot call you Licurgusses,) if the
drink you give me, touch my Palate aduersly, I make a crooked face at it, I can
say, your Worshippes have delivered the matter well, when I find the Ass in
compound, with the Mayor part of your syllables. And though I must be content
to bear with those, that say you are reverend grave men, yet they lie deadly,
that tell you have good faces, if you see this in the Map of my Microcosme,
follows it that I am known well enough too? What harm can your beesome
Conspectuities gleane out of this Charracter, if I be known well enough too


Come sir come, we know you well enough.


You know neither me, your selves, nor any thing: you are ambitious, for poor
knaves cappes and legs: you wear out a good wholesome Forenoone, in hearing
a cause between an Orendge wife, and a Forsetseller, and then reiourne the
Controversy of threepence to a second day of Audience. When you are hearing a
matter between party and party, if you chance to be pinched with the
Collicke, you make faces like Mummers, set up the bloody Flagge against all
Patience, and in roaring for a Chamber Pot, dismiss the Controversy bleeding,
the more entangled by your hearing: All the peace you make in their Cause, is
calling both the parties Knaves. You are a pair of strange ones


Come, come, you are well understood to be a perfecter gyber for the Table,
then a necessary Bencher in the Capitol


Our very Priests must become Mockers, if they shall encounter such ridiculous
Subjects as you are, when you speak best unto the purpose. It is not worth
the wagging of your Beards, and your Beards deserve not so honorable a grave,
as to stuff a Botchers Cushion, or to be entombed in an Asses Packe-saddle;
yet you must be saying, Martius is proud: who in a cheap estimation, is worth
all your predecessors, since Deucalion, though peradventure some of the best of
'em were hereditarie hangmen. Godden to your Worships, more of your
conversation would infect my Brain, being the Heardsmen of the Beastly
Plebeans. I will be bold to take my leave of you

How now (my as fair as Noble) Ladies, and the Moon were she Earthly, no
Nobler; whither do you follow your Eyes so fast


Honorable Menenius, my Boy Martius approches: for the love of Juno let us go.


Ha? Martius coming home?


I, worthy Menenius* and with most prosperous approbation.


Take my Cappe Jupiter, and I thank thee: hoo, Martius coming home?


Nay, it is true.


Look, here is a Letter from him, the State has another, his Wife another, and
(I think) there is one at home for you


I will make my very house reele to night:
A Letter for me?

Yes certain, there is a Letter for you, I saw't.


A Letter for me? it gives me an Estate of seven years health; in which time,
I will make a Lip at the Physician: The most sovereign Prescription in
Galen, is but Emperick qutique; and to this Preservative, of no better report
then a Horse-drench. Is he not wounded? he was wont to come home wounded


Oh no, no, no.


Oh, he is wounded, I thank the Gods for it.


So do I too, if it be not too much: brings a Victory in his Pocket? the
wounds become him


On's Brows: Menenius, he comes the third time home with the Oaken Garland.


Has he disciplined Auffidius soundly?


Titus Lartius writes, they fought together, but Auffidius got off.


And 'twas time for him too, I Will warrant him that: and he had stayed by him, I
would not have been so fiddious'd, for all the Chests in Carioles, and the Gold
that is in them. Is the Senate possessed of this


Good Ladies let us go. Yes, yes, yes: The Senate has Letters from the
General, wherein he gives my Son the whole Name of the War: he has in
this action outdone his former deeds doubly


In troth, there is wondrous things spoke of him.


Wondrous: I, I warrant you, and not without his true purchasing.


The Gods grant them true.


True? pow waw.


True? I Will be sworn they are true: where is he wounded, God save your good
Worships? Martius is coming home: he has more cause to be proud: where is he
wounded


In The Shoulder, and in the left Arm: there will be large Cicatrices to show the
People, when he shall stand for his place: he received in the repulse of
Tarquin seven hurts in the Body


One in the Neck, and two in the Thigh, there is nine that I know.


He had, before this last Expedition, twenty five Wounds upon him.


Now it is twenty seven; every gash was an Enemies Grave. Hark, the Trumpets.


These are the Vshers of Martius:
Before him, he carries Noise;
And behind him, he leaves Tears:
Death, that dark Spirit, in's neruie Arm does lie,
Which being advanced, declines, and then men dye.

Know Rome, that all alone Martius did fight
Within Corioles Gates: where he has won,
With Fame, a Name to Martius Caius:
These in honor follows Martius Caius Coriolanus.
Welcome to Rome, renowned Coriolanus.

Welcome to Rome, renowned Coriolanus.


No more of this, it does offend my heart: pray now no more.


Look, Sir, your Mother.


Oh! you have, I know, petitioned all the Gods for my prosperity.


Nay, my good Soldier, up:
My gentle Martius, worthy Caius,
And by deed-atchieuing Honor newly named,
What is it (Coriolanus) must I call thee?
But oh, thy Wife.

My gracious silence, hayle:
Would thou have laughed, had I come Coffined home,
That weep'st to see me triumph? Ah my dear,
Such eyes the Widows in Carioles were,
And Mothers that lack Sons.

Now the Gods Crown thee.


And live you yet? Oh my sweet Lady, pardon.


I know not where to turn.
Oh welcome home: and welcome General,
And y' are welcome all.

A hundred thousand Welcomes:
I could weep, and I could laugh,
I am light, and heavy; welcome:
A Curse begin at very root on's heart,
That is not glad to see thee.
You are three, that Rome should dote on:
Yet by the faith of men, we have
Some old Crab-trees here at home,
That will not be grafted to your Rallish.
Yet welcome Warriors:
We call a Nettle, but a Nettle;
And the faults of fools, but folly.

Ever right.


Menenius, ever, ever.


Give way there, and go on.


Your Hand, and yours?
Ere in our own house I do shade my Head,
The good Patricians must be visited,
From whom I have received not only greetings,
But with them, change of Honors.

I have lived,
To see inherited my very Wishes,
And the Buildings of my Fancy:
Only there is one thing wanting,
Which (I doubt not) but our Rome
Will cast upon thee.

Know, good Mother,
I had rather be their servant in my way,
Then sway with them in theirs.

On, to the Capital.


All tongues speak of him, and the bleared sights
Are spectacled to see him. Your prattling Nurse
Into a rapture lets her Baby cry,
While she chats him: the Kitchen Malkin pinnes
Her richest Lockram 'bout her reechie neck,
Clambring the Walls to eye him:
Stalls, Bulkes, Windows, are smothered up,
Leads filled, and Ridges horsed
With variable Complexions; all agreeing
In earnestness to see him: seld-showne Flamins
Do press among the popular Throngs, and puff
To win a vulgar station: our veyl'd Dames
Commit the War of White and Damask
In their nicely gawded Cheeks, toth' wanton spoil
Of Phoebus burning Kisses: such a poother,
As if that whatsoever God, who leads him,
Were slyly crept into his humane powers,
And gave him graceful posture.

On the sudden, I warrant him Consul.


Then our Office may, during his power, go sleep.


He cannot temp'rately transport his Honors,
From where he should begin, and end, but will
Lose those he has won.

In that there is comfort.


Doubt not,
The Commoners, for whom we stand, but they
Upon their ancient malice, will forget
With the least cause, these his new Honors,
Which that he will give them, make I as little question,
As he is proud to do it.

I heard him swear,
Were he to stand for Consul, never would he
Appear in the Market place, nor on him put
The Naples Vesture of Humility,
Nor showing (as the manner is) his Wounds
Toth' People, beg their stinking Breaths.

It Is right.


It was his word:
Oh he would miss it, rather then carry it,
But by the suite of the Gentry to him,
And the desire of the Nobles.

I wish no better, then have him hold that purpose, and to put it in execution.


It Is most like he will.


It shall be to him then, as our good wills; a sure destruction.


So it must fall out
To him, or our Authorities, for an end.
We must suggest the People, in what hatred
He still has held them: that to's power he would
Have made them Mules, silenced their Pleaders,
And dispropertied their Freedoms; holding them,
In humane Action, and Capacity,
Of no more Soul, nor fitness for the World,
Then Cammels in their War, who have their Prouand
Only for bearing Burdens, and sore blows
For sinking under them.

This (as you say) suggested,
At some time, when his soaring Insolence
Shall teach the People, which time shall not want,
If he be put upon it, and that is as easy,
As to set Dogs on Sheep, will be his fire
To kindle their dry Stubble: and their Blaze
Shall darken him for ever.

What Is the matter?


You are sent for to the Capitol:
It Is thought, that Martius shall be Consul:
I have seen the dumb men throng to see him,
And the blind to hear him speak: Matrons flong Gloves,
Ladies and Maids their Scarffes, and Handkerchers,
Upon him as he passed: the Nobles bended
As to Jove's Statue, and the Commons made
A Shower, and Thunder, with their Caps, and Showts:
I never saw the like.

Let Us to the Capitol,
And carry with us Ears and Eyes for the time,
But Hearts for the event.

Have with you.


Come, come, they are almost here: how many stand for Consulships?


Three, they say: but it is thought of every one, Coriolanus will carry it.


That Is a brave fellow: but he is vengeance proud, and loves not the common
people


'Faith, there has been many great men that have flattered the people, who
never loved them; and there be many that they have loved, they know not
wherefore: so that if they love they know not why, they hate upon no better a
ground. Therefore, for Coriolanus neither to care whether they love, or hate
him, manifests the true knowledge he has in their disposition, and out of his
Noble carelessness lets them plainly see it


If he did not care whether he had their love, or no, he waued indifferently,
'twixt doing them neither good, nor harm: but he seeks their hate with
greater devotion, then they can render it him; and leaves nothing undone, that
may fully discover him their opposite. Now to seem to affect the malice and
displeasure of the People, is as bad, as that which he dislikes, to flatter
them for their love


He has deserved worthily of his Country, and his assent is not by such
easy degrees as those, who having been supple and courteous to the People,
Bonnetted, without any further deed, to have them at all into their estimation,
and report: but he has so planted his Honors in their Eyes, and his actions
in their Hearts, that for their Tongues to be silent, and not confess so much,
were a kind of ungrateful Injury: to report otherwise, were a Malice, that
giving it self the Lie, would pluck reproof and rebuke from every Ear that
heard it


No more of him, he is a worthy man: make way, they are coming.


Having determined of the Volces,
And to send for Titus Lartius: it remains,
As the maine Point of this our after-meeting,
To gratify his Noble service, that has
Thus stood for his Country. Therefore please you,
Most reverend and grave Elders, to desire
The present Consul, and last General,
In our well-found Successes, to report
A little of that worthy Work, performed
By Martius Caius Coriolanus: whom
We met here, both to thank, and to remember,
With Honors like himself.

Speak, good Cominius:
Leave nothing out for length, and make us think
Rather our states defective for requital,
Then we to stretch it out. Masters a' the People,
We do request your kindest ears: and after
Your loving motion toward the common Body,
To yield what passes here.

We are conuented upon a pleasing Treaty, and have hearts inclinable to honor
and advance the Theme of our Assembly


Which the rather we shall be blessed to do, if he remember a kinder value of
the People, then he has hereto prized them at


That Is off, that is off: I would you rather had been silent: Please you to
hear Cominius speak


Most willingly: but yet my Caution was more pertinent then the rebuke you give
it


He loves your People, but tie him not to be their Bedfellow: Worthy Cominius
speak

Nay, keep your place.

Sit Coriolanus: never shame to hear
What you have Nobly done.

Your Honors pardon:
I had rather have my Wounds to heal again,
Then hear say how I got them.

Sir, I hope my words dis-bench'd you not?


No Sir: yet often,
When blows have made me stay, I fled from words.
You soothed not, therefore hurt not: but your People,
I love them as they weigh --

Pray now sit down.


I had rather have one scratch my Head in the Sun,
When the Alarm were struck, then idly sit
To hear my Nothings monster'd.

Masters of the People,
Your multiplying Spawne, how can he flatter?
That Is thousand to one good one, when you now see
He had rather venture all his Limbs for Honor,
Then on ones Ears to hear it. Proceed Cominius.

I shall lack voice: the deeds of Coriolanus
Should not be vtter'd feebly: it is held,
That Valor is the chiefest Virtue,
And most dignifies the hauer: if it be,
The man I speak of, cannot in the World
Be singly counter-poys'd. At sixteen years,
When Tarquin made a Head for Rome, he fought
Beyond the mark of others: our then Dictator,
Whom with all praise I point at, saw him fight,
When with his Amazonian Shinne he drove
The brizled Lips before him: he bestrid
An o're-prest Roman, and in the Consuls view
Slew three Opposers: Tarquins self he met,
And struck him on his Knee: in that days feats,
When he might act the Woman in the Scene,
He proved best man in the field, and for his meed
Was Brow-bound with the Oak. His Pupil age
Man-entred thus, he waxed like a Sea,
And in the brunt of seventeen Battles since,
He lurcht all Swords of the Garland: for this last,
Before, and in Corioles, let me say
I cannot speak him home: he stopped the flyers,
And by his rare example made the Coward
Turn terror into sport: as Weeds before
A Vessel under sail, so men obeyed,
And fell below his Stem: his Sword, Deaths stamp,
Where it did mark, it took from face to foot:
He was a thing of Blood, whose every motion
Was timed with dying Cries: alone he entered
The mortal Gate of the City, which he painted
With shunlesse destiny: aydelesse came off,
And with a sudden re-inforcement struck
Carioles like a Planet: now all is his,
When by and by the dinne of War began pierce
His ready sense: then straight his doubled spirit
Requickned what in flesh was fatigate,
And to the Battle came he, where he did
Run reeking over the lives of men, as if 'twere
A perpetual spoil: and till we called
Both Field and City ours, he never stood
To ease his Breast with panting.

Worthy man.


He cannot but with measure fit the Honors which we devise him.


Our spoils he kicked at,
And looked upon things precious, as they were
The common Muck of the World: he couets less
Then Misery it self would give, rewards his deeds
With doing them, and is content
To spend the time* to end it.

He Is right Noble, let him be called for.


Call Coriolanus.


He does appear.


The Senate, Coriolanus, are well pleased to make thee Consul.


I do owe them still my Life, and Services.


It then remains, that you do speak to the People.


I do beseech you,
Let me o're-leape that custom: for I cannot
Put on the Gown, stand naked, and entreat them
For my Wounds sake, to give their sufferage:
Please you that I may pass this doing.

Sir, the People must have their Voices,
Neither will they bate one jot of Ceremony.

Put them not to it:
Pray you go fit you to the Custom,
And take to you, as your Predecessors have,
Your Honor with your form.

It is a part that I shall blush in acting,
And might well be taken from the People.

Mark you that.


To brag unto them, thus I did, and thus
Show them the vnaking Skarres, which I should hide,
As if I had received them for the hyre
Of their breath only.

Do not stand upon it:
We recommend to you Tribunes of the People
Our purpose to them, and to our Noble Consul
Wish we all Joy, and Honor.

To Coriolanus come all joy and Honor.


You see how he intends to use the people.


May they perceiue's intent: he will require them
As if he did contemn what he requested,
Should be in them to give.

Come, we will inform them
Of our proceedings here on the Market place,
I know they do attend us.

Once if he do require our voices, we ought not to deny him.


We may Sir if we will.


We have power in our selves to do it, but it is a power that we have no power
to do: For, if he show us his wounds, and tell us his deeds, we are to put our
tongues into those wounds, and speak for them: So if he tell us his Noble
deeds, we must also tell him our Noble acceptance of them. Ingratitude is
monstrous, and for the multitude to be ungrateful, were to make a Monster of
the multitude; of the which, we being members, should bring our selves to be
monstrous members


And to make us no better thought of a little help will serve: for once we
stood up about the Corn, he himself stuck not to call us the many-headed
Multitude


We have been called so of many, not that our heads are some brown, some
black, some Abram, some bald; but that our wits are so diversely Coulord; and
truly I think, if all our wits were to issue out of one Scull, they would
fly East, West, North, South, and their consent of one direct way, should be
at once to all the points a' th Compass


Think you so? Which way do you judge my wit would fly.


Nay your wit will not so soon out as another man's will, it is strongly wadg'd
up in a blocke-head: but if it were at liberty, 'twould sure Southward


Why that way?


To loose it self in a Fogge, where being three parts melted away with rotten
Dewes, the fourth would return for Conscience sake, to help to get thee a
Wife


You are never without your tricks, you may, you may.


Are you all resolved to give your voices? But that is no matter, the greater
part carries it, I say. If he would incline to the people, there was never a
worthier man

Here he comes, and in the Gown of humility, mark his behavior: we are not
to stay altogether, but to come by him where he stands, by ones, by twoes, and
by threes. He Is to make his requests by particulars, wherein every one of us
has a single Honor, in giving him our own voices with our own tongues,
therefore follow me, and I Will direct you how you shall go by him


Content, content.


Oh Sir, you are not right: have you not known
The worthiest men have done't?

What must I say, I pray Sir?
Plague upon it, I cannot bring
My tougue to such a pace. Look Sir, my wounds,
I got them in my Countries Service, when
Some certain of your Brethren roared, and ran
From the noise of our own Drums.

Oh me the Gods, you must not speak of that,
You must desire them to think upon you.

Think upon me? Hang 'em,
I would they would forget me, like the Virtues
Which our Divines lose by em.

You Will mar all.
I Will leave you: Pray you speak to em, I pray you
In wholesome manner.

Bid them wash their Faces,
And keep their teeth clean: So, here comes a brace,
You know the cause (Sir) of my standing here.

We do Sir, tell us what has brought you to it.


Mine own desert.


Your own desert.


I, but mine own desire.


How not your own desire?


No Sir, 'twas never my desire yet to trouble the poor with begging.


You must think if we give you any thing, we hope to gain by you.


Well then I pray, your price a' the Consulship.


The price is, to ask it kindly.


Kindly sir, I pray let me have it: I have wounds to show you, which shall be
yours in private: your good voice Sir, what say you


You shall have it worthy Sir.


A match Sir, there is in all two worthy voices begged: I have your Alms,
Adieu


But this is something odd.


And 'twere to give again: but it is no matter.


Pray you now, if it may stand with the tune of your voices, that I may be
Consul, I have here the Customarie Gown


You have deserved Nobly of your Country, and you have not deserved Nobly.


Your Aenigma.


You have bin a scourge to her enemies, you have bin a Rod to her Friends, you
have not indeed loved the Common people


You should account me the more Virtuous, that I have not bin common in my
Love, I will sir flatter my sworn Brother the people to earne a deerer
estimation of them, it is a condition they account gentle* and since the
wisdom of their choice, is rather to have my Hat, then my Heart, I will
practice the insinuating nod, and be off to them most counterfetly, that is
sir, I will counterfeit the bewitchment of some popular man, and give it
bountiful to the desire^s: Therefore beseech you, I may be Consul


We hope to find you our friend: and therefore give you our voices heartily.


You have received many wounds for your Country.


I will not Seal your knowledge with showing them. I will make much of your
voices, and so trouble you no farther


The Gods give you joy Sir heartily.


Most sweet Voices:
Better it is to dye, better to sterue,
Then crave the higher, which first we do deserve.
Why in this Wooluish tongue should I stand here,
To beg of Hob and Dicke, that does appear
Their needless Vouches: Custom calls me to it.
What Custom wills in all things, should we do it?
The Dust on antique Time would lie unswept,
And mountainous Error be too highly heapt,
For Truth to o're-peere. Rather then fool it so,
Let the high Office and the Honor go
To one that would do thus. I am half through,
The one part suffered, the other will I do.
Here come more Voices.
Your Voices? for your Voices I have fought,
Watched for your Voices: for your Voices, bear
Of Wounds, two dozen odd: Battles thrice six
I have seen, and heard of: for your Voices,
Have done many things, some less, some more:
Your Voices? Indeed I would be Consul.

He has done Nobly, and cannot go without any honest man's Voice.


Therefore let him be Consul: the Gods give him joy, and make him good friend
to the People


Amen, Amen. God save thee, Noble Consul.


Worthy Voices.


You have stood your Limitation:
And the Tribunes endue you with the Peoples Voice,
Remains, that in the Official Marks invested,
You anon do meet the Senate.

Is this done?


The Custom of Request you have discharged:
The People do admit you and are summoned
To meet anon, upon your approbation.

Where? at the Senate House?


There, Coriolanus.


May I change these Garments?


You may, Sir.


That I Will straight do: and knowing my self again,
Repair toth' Senate House.

I Will keep you company. Will you along?


We stay here for the People.


Fare you well.

He has it now: and by his Looks, me thinks,
It Is warm at's heart.

With a proud heart he wore his humble Weeds:
Will you dismiss the People?

How now, my Masters, have you chose this man?


He has our Voices, Sir.


We pray the Gods, he may deserve your loves.


Amen, Sir: to my poor unworthy notice,
He mocked us, when he begged our Voices.

Certainly, he flowted us downright.


No, it is his kind of speech, he did not mock us.


Not one amongst us, save your self, but says
He used us scornefully: he should have showed us
His Marks of Merit, Wounds received for's Country.

Why so he did I am sure.


No, no: no man saw 'em.


He said he had Wounds,
Which he could show in private:
And with his Hat, thus wauing it in scorn,
I would be Consul, says he: aged Custom,
But by your Voices, will not so permit me.
Your Voices therefore: when we granted that,
Here was, I thank you for your Voices, thank you
Your most sweet Voices: now you have left your Voices
I have no further with you. Was not this mockery?

Why either were you ignorant to see it?
Or seeing it, of such Childish friendlinesse,
To yield your Voices?

Could you not have told him,
As you were lesson'd: When he had no Power,
But was a petty servant to the State,
He was your Enemy, ever sp^ke against
Your Liberties, and the Charters that you bear
IN the Body of the Weal: and now arriving
A place of Potencie, and sway of the State,
If he should still malignantly remain
Fast Foe toth' Plebeij, your Voices might
Be Curses to your selves. You should have said,
That as his worthy deeds did claim no less
Then what he stood for: so his gracious nature
Would think upon you, for your Voices,
And translate his Malice toward you, into Love,
Standing your friendly Lord.

Thus to have said,
As you were fore-aduis'd, had touched his Spirit,
And tried his Inclinations from him plucked
Either his gracious Promise, which you might
As cause had called you up, have held him to;
Or else it would have galled his surly nature,
Which easily endures not Article,
Tying him to ought, so putting him to Rage,
You should have taken the advantage of his Choler,
And passed him vnelected.

Did you perceive,
He did solicit you in free Contempt,
When he did need your Loves* and do you think,
That his Contempt shall not be brusing to you,
When he has power to crush? Why, had your Bodies
No Heart among you? Or had you Tongues, to cry
Against the Rectorship of Judgment?

Have you, ere now denied the as^er:
And now again, of him that did not ask, but mock,
Bestow your su'd for Tongues?

He Is not confirmed, we may deny him yet.


And will deny him:
I Will have five hundred Voices of that sound.

I twice five hundred and their friends, to piece 'em.


Get you hence instantly, and tell those friends,
They have chose a Consul, that will from them take
Their Liberties, make them of no more Voice
Then Dogs, that are as often beat for barking,
As therefore kept to do so.

Let them assemble: and on a safer Judgment,
All revoke your ignorant election: Enforce his Pride,
And his old Hate unto you: besides, forget not
With what Contempt he wore the humble Weed,
How in his Suit he scorned you: but your Loves,
Thinking upon his Services, took from you
The apprehension of his present portance,
Which most gibingly, vngrauely, he did fashion
After the inueterate Hate he bears you.

Lay a fault on us, your Tribunes,
That we labored (no impediment between)
But that you must cast your Election on him.

Say you chose him, more after our commandment,
Then as guided by your own true affections, and that
Your Minds pre-occupy'd with what you rather must do,
Then what you should, made you against the grain
To Voice him Consul. Lay the fault on us.

I, spare us not: Say, we read Lectures to you,
How youngly he began to serve his Country,
How long continued, and what stock he springs of,
The Noble House* of the Martians: from whence came
That Ancus Martius, Numaes Daughters Son:
Who after great Hostilius here was King,
Of the same House Publius and Quintus were,
That our best Water, brought by Conduits hither,
And Nobly named, so twice being Censor,
Was his great Ancestor.

One thus descended,
That has beside well in his person wrought,
To be set high in place, we did commend
To your remembrances: but you have found,
Skaling his present bearing with his past,
That he is your fixed enemy; and revoke
Your sudden approbation.

Say you never had don't,
(Harp on that still) but by our putting on:
And presently, when you have drawn your number,
Repair toth' Capitol.

We will so: almost all repent in their election.


Let them go on:
This Mutiny were better put in hazard,
Then stay past doubt, for greater:
If, as his nature is, he fall in rage
With their refusal, both observe and answer
The vantage of his anger.

Toth' Capitol, come:
We will be there before the stream of the People:
And this shall seem, as partly it is, their own,
Which we have goaded on-ward.

Tullus Auffidius then had made new head.


He had, my Lord, and that it was which caused
Our swifter Composition.

So then the Volces stand but as at first,
Ready when time shall prompt them, to make road
Vpon's again.

They are worn (Lord Consul) so,
That we shall hardly in our ages see
Their Banners wave again.

Saw you Auffidius?


On safeguard he came to me, and did curse
Against the Volces, for they had so vildly
Yielded the Town: he is retired to Antium.

Spoke he of me?


He did, my Lord.


How? what?


How often he had met you Sword to Sword:
That of all things upon the Earth, he hated
Your person most: That he would pawn his fortunes
To hopeless restitution, so he might
Be called your Vanquisher.

At Antium lives he?


At Antium.


I wish I had a cause to seek him there,
To oppose his hatred fully. Welcome home.
Behold, these are the Tribunes of the People,
The Tongues of the Common Mouth. I do despise them:
For they do pranke them in Authority,
Against all Noble sufferance.

Pass no further.


Hah? what is that?


It will be dangerous to go on -- No further.


What makes this change?


The matter?


Has he not passed the Noble, and the Common?


Cominius, no.


Have I had Childrens Voices?


Tribunes give way, he shall toth' Market place.


The People are incensed against him.


Stop, or all will fall in broyle.


Are these your Heard?
Must these have Voices, that can yield them now,
And straight disclaim their toungs? what are your Offices?
You being their Mouths, why rule you not their Teeth?
Have you not set them on?

Be calm, be calm.


It is a purposed thing, and grows by Plot,
To curb the will of the Nobility:
Suffer't, and live with such as cannot rule,
Nor ever will be ruled.

Called not a Plot:
The People cry you mocked them: and of late,
When Corn was given them gratis, you repined,
Scandal'd the Suppliants: for the People, called them
Time-pleasers, flatterers, foes to Nobleness.

Why this was known before.


Not to them all.


Have you informed them sithence?


How? I inform them?


You are like to do such business.


Not unlike each way to better yours.


Why then should I be Consul? by yond Clouds
Let me deserve so ill as you, and make me
Your fellow Tribune.

You show too much of that,
For which the People stir: if you will pass
To where you are bound, you must enquire your way,
Which you are out of, with a gentler spirit,
Or never be so Noble as a Consul,
Nor yoke with him for Tribune.

Let Us be calm.


The People are abused: set on, this paltring
Becomes not Rome: nor has Coriolanus
Deserved this so dishonored Rub, laid falsely
IN the plain Way of his Merit.

Tell me of Corn: this was my speech,
And I will speak't again.

Not now, not now.


Not in this heat, Sir, now.


Now as I live, I will.
My Nobler friends, I crave their pardons:
For the mutable ranke-sented Meynie,
Let them regard me, as I do not flatter,
And therein behold themselves: I say again,
In soothing them, we nourish against our Senate
The Cockle of Rebellion, Insolence, Sedition,
Which we our selves have plowed for, sowed, and scattered,
By mingling them with us, the honored Number,
Who lack not Virtue, no, nor Power, but that
Which they have given to Beggars.

Well, no more.


No more words, we beseech you.


How? no more?
As for my Country, I have shed my blood,
Not fearing outward force: So shall my Lungs
Coin words till their decay, against those Meazels
Which we disdain should Tetter us, yet sought
The very way to catch them.

You speak a' the people, as if you were a God,
To punish; Not a man, of their Infirmity.

'Twere well we let the people know it.


What, what? His Choler?


Choler? Were I as patient as the midnight sleep,
By Jove, 'twould be my mind.

It is a mind that shall remain a poison
Where it is: not poison any further.

Shall remain?
Hear you this Triton of the Minnoues? Mark you
His absolute Shall?

'Twas from the Cannon.


Shall? O God! but most unwise Patricians: why
You grave, but wreaklesse Senators, have you thus
Given Hidra here to choose an Officer,
That with his peremptory Shall, being but
The horn, and noise of the Monsters, wants not spirit
To say, he will turn your Current in a ditch,
And make your Channel his? If he have power,
Then vale your Ignorance: If none, awake
Your dangerous Lenity: If you are Learned,
Be not as common Fools; if you are not,
Let them have Cushions by you. You are Plebeians,
If they be Senators: and they are no less,
When both your voices blended, the great'st taste
Most pallates theirs. They choose their Magistrate,
And such a one as he, who puts his Shall,
His popular Shall, against a grauer Bench
Then ever frowned in Greece. By Jove himself,
It makes the Consuls base; and my Soul aches
To know, when two Authorities are up,
Neither Supreme; How soon Confusion
May enter 'twixt the gap of Both, and take
The one by the other.

Well, on to' the Market place.


Who ever gave that Counsel, to give forth
The Corn a' the Storehouse gratis, as 'twas used
Sometime in Greece.

Well, well, no more of that.


Though there the people had more absolute power I say they norisht
disobedience: fed, the ruin of the State


Why shall the people give
One that speaks thus, their voice?

I Will give my Reasons,
More worthier then their Voices. They know the Corn
Was not our recompense, resting well assured
They never did service for it; being pressed to' the War,
Even when the Navel of the State was touched,
They would not thread the Gates: This kind of Service
Did not deserve Corn gratis. Being in the War,
There Mutinies and Reuolts, wherein they showed
Most Valor spoke not for them. The Accusation
Which they have often made against the Senate,
All cause unborn, could never be the Native
Of our so frank Donation. Well, what then?
How shall this Bosome-multiplied, digest
The Senates Courtesy? Let deeds express
What Is like to be their words, We did request it,
We are the greater pole, and in true fear
They gave us our demands. Thus we debase
The Nature of our Seats, and make the Rabble
Call our Cares, Fears; which will in time
Break open the Locks a' the Senate, and bring in
The Crows to pecke the Eagles.

Come enough.


Enough, with over measure.


No, take more.
What may be sworn by, both Divine and Humane,
Seal what I end withal. This double worship,
Whereon part does disdain with cause, the other
Insult without all reason: where Gentry, Title, wisdom
Cannot conclude, but by the yea and no
Of general Ignorance, it must omit
Real Necessities, and give way the while
To unstable Slightness. Purpose so barred, it follows,
Nothing is done to purpose. Therefore beseech you,
You that will be less fearful, then discreet,
That love the Fundamental part of State
More then you doubt the change on it: That prefer
A Noble life, before a Long, and Wish,
To iumpe a Body with a dangerous Physic,
That Is sure of death without it: at once pluck out
The Multitudinous Tongue, let them not ^icke
The sweet which is their poison. Your dishonor
Mangles true judgment, and bereaues the State
Of that Integrity which should becom't:
Not having the power to do the good it would
For the ill which does controul't.

Has said enough.


Has spoken like a Traitor, and shall answer
As Traitors do.

Thou wretch, despite ore-whelme thee:
What should the people do with these bald Tribunes?
On whom depending, their obedience fails
To' the greater Bench, in a Rebellion:
When what is not mee^, but what must be, was Law,
Then were they chosen: in a better hour,
Let what is meet, be said it must be meet,
And throw their power in the dust.

Manifest Treason.


This a Consul? No.


The Ediles hoe: Let him be apprehended:


Go call the people, in whose name my Self
Attach thee as a Traitorous Innouator:
A Foe to' the public Weal. Obey I charge thee,
And follow to thine answer.

Hence old Goat.


We Will Surety him.


Aged sir, hands-off.


Hence rotten thing, or I shall shake thy bones
Out of thy Garments.

Help ye Citizens.


On both sides more respect.


Here Is he, that would take from you all your power.


Seize him Aediles.


Down with him, down with him.


Weapons, weapons, weapons:
Tribunes, Patricians, Citizens: what ho:
Sicinius, Brutus, Coriolanus, Citizens.

Peace, peace, peace, stay, hold, peace.


What is about to be? I am out of Breath,
Confusions near, I cannot speak. You, Tribunes
To' the people: Coriolanus, patience: Speak good Sicinius.

Hear me, People peace.


Let Us here our Tribune: peace, speak, speak, speak.


You are at point to lose your Liberties:
Martius would have all from you; Martius,
Whom late you have named for Consul.

Fie, fie, fie, this is the way to kindle, not to quench.


To vnbuild the City, and to lay all flat.


What is the City, but the People?


True, the People are the City.


By the consent of all, we were established the Peoples Magistrates.


You so remain.


And so are like to do.


That is the way to lay the City flat,
To bring the Roof to the Foundation,
And bury all, which yet distinctly raunges
In heaps, and piles of Ruin.

This deserves Death.


Or let us stand to our Authority,
Or let us lose it: we do here pronounce,
Upon the part of the People, in whose power
We were elected theirs, Martius is worthy
Of present Death.

Therefore lay hold of him:
Bear him toth' Rock Tarpeian, and from thence
Into destruction cast him.

Aediles seize him.


Yield Martius, yield.


Hear me one word, 'beseech you Tribunes, hear me but a word.


Peace, peace.


Be that you seem, truly your Countries friend,
And temp^rately proceed to what you would
Thus violently redress.

Sir, those cold ways,
That seem like prudent helps, are very poisonous,
Where the Disease is violent. Lay hands upon him,
And bear him to the Rock.

No, I Will die here:
There Is some among you have beheld me fighting,
Come try upon your selves, what you have seen me.

Down with that Sword, Tribunes withdraw a while.


Lay hands upon him.


Help Martius, help: you that be noble, help him young and old.


Down with him, down with him.


Go, get you to our House: be gone, away.
All will be naught else.

Get you gone.


Stand fast, we have as many friends as enemies.


Shall it be put to that?


The Gods forbid:
I prithee noble friend, home to thy House,
Leave us to cure this Cause.

For it is a Sore upon us,
You cannot Tent your self: be gone, 'beseech you.

Come Sir, along with us.


I would they were Barbarians, as they are,
Though in Rome litter'd not Romans, as they are not,
Though calued in the Porch of the Capitol:
Be gone, put not your worthy Rage into your Tongue,
One time will owe another.

On fair ground, I could beat forty of them.


I could my self take up a Brace of the best of them, yea, the two Tribunes.


But now it is odds beyond Arithmetic,
And Manhood is called Foolerie, when it stands
Against a falling Fabric. Will you hence,
Before the Tagge return? whose Rage does rend
Like interrupted Waters, and o're-beare
What they are used to bear.

Pray you be gone:
I Will try whether my old Wit be in request
With those that have but little: this must be patcht
With Cloth of any Color.

Nay, come away.


This man has marred his fortune.


His nature is too noble for the World:
He would not flatter Neptune for his Trident,
Or Jove, for's power to Thunder: his Heart's his Mouth:
What his Breast forges, that his Tongue must vent,
And being angry, does forget that ever
He heard the Name of Death.
Here Is goodly work.

I would they were a bed.


I would they were in Tyber.
What the vengeance, could he not speak 'em fair?

Where is this Viper,
That would depopulate the city, and be every man himself

You worthy Tribunes.


He shall be thrown down the Tarpeian rock
With rigorous hands: he has resisted Law,
And therefore Law shall scorn him further Trial
Then the severity of the public Power,
Which he so sets at naught.

He shall well know the Noble Tribunes are
The peoples mouths, and we their hands.

He shall sure out.


Sir, sir.


Peace.


Do not cry havoc, where you should but hunt
With modest warrant.

Sir, how come that you have help
To make this rescue?

Here me speak? As I do know
The Consuls worthiness, so can I name his Faults.

Consul? what Consul?


The Consul Coriolanus.


He Consul.


No, no, no, no, no.


If by the Tribunes leave,
And yours good people,
I may be heard, I would crave a word or two,
The which shall turn you to no further harm,
Then so much loss of time.

Speak breefely then,
For we are peremptory to dispatch
This Viporous Traitor: to eiect him hence
Were but one danger, and to keep him here
Our certain death: therefore it is decreed,
He dies to night.

Now the good Gods forbid,
That our renowned Rome* whose gratitude
Toward her deserved Children, is enrolled
In Jove's own Book, like an unnatural Dam
Should now eat up her own.

He Is a Disease that must be cut away.


Oh he is a Limb, that has but a Disease
Mortal, to cut it off: to cure it, easy.
What has he done to Rome, that is worthy death?
Killing our Enemies, the blood he has lost
(Which I dare vouch, is more then that he has
By many an Ounce) he dropped it for his Country:
And what is left, to loose it by his Country,
Were to us all that do it, and suffer it
A brand to the end a 'th World.

This is clean kamme.


Merely awry:
When he did love his Country, it honored him.

The service of the foot
Being once gangrened, is not then respected
For what before it was.

We Will hear no more:
Pursue him to his house, and pluck him thence,
Least his infection being of catching nature,
Spread further.

One word more, one word:
This Tiger-footed-rage, when it shall find
The harm of vnskan'd swiftness, will (too late)
Tie Leaden pounds too's heels. Proceed by Process,
Least parties (as he is beloved) break out,
And sack great Rome with Romans.

If it were so?


What do ye talk?
Have we not had a taste of his Obedience?
Our Ediles smot: our selves resisted: come.

Consider this: He has bin bred in the Wars
Since a could draw a Sword, and is ill schooled
In boulted Language: Meal and Bran together
He throws without distinction. Give me leave,
I Will go to him, and undertake to bring him in peace,
Where he shall answer by a lawful Form
(In peace) to his utmost peril.

Noble Tribunes,
It is the humane way: the other course
Will prove to bloody: and the end of it,
Unknown to the Beginning.

Noble Menenius, be you then as the peoples officer:
Masters, lay down your Weapons.

Go not home.


Meet on the Market place: we will attend you there:
Where if you bring not Martius, we will proceed
In our first way.

I Will bring him to you.
Let me desire your company: he must come,
Or what is worst will follow.

Pray you let us to him.


Let them pull all about mine ears, present me
Death on the Wheel, or at wild Horses heels,
Or pile ten hills on the Tarpeian Rock,
That the precipitation might down stretch
Below the beam of sight; yet will I still
Be thus to them.

You do the Nobler.


I muse my Mother
Does not approve me further, who was wont
To call them Woollen Vassailes, things created
To buy and sell with Groats, to show bare heads
In Congregations, to yawne, be still, and wonder,
When one but of my ordinance stood up
To speak of Peace, or War. I talk of you,
Why did you wish me milder? Would you have me
False to my Nature? Rather say, I play
The man I am.

Oh sir, sir, sir,
I would have had you put your power well on
Before you had worn it out.

Let go.


You might have been enough the man you are,
With striving less to be so: Lesser had bin
The things of your dispositions, if
You had not showed them how ye were disposed
Ere they lacked power to cross you.

Let them hang.


I, and burn too.


Come, come, you have bin too rough, something too rough: you must return, and
mend it


There Is no remedy,
Unless by not so doing, our good City
Cleave in the amidst, and perish.

Pray be counsail'd;
I have a heart as little apt as yours,
But yet a brain, that leads my use of Anger
To better vantage.

Well said, Noble woman:
Before he should thus stoop to' the heart, but that
The violent fit a' the time craves it as Physic
For the whole State; I would put mine Armor on,
Which I can scarsely bear.

What must I do?


Return to the Tribunes.


Well, what then? what then?


Repent, what you have spoke.


For them, I cannot do it to the Gods,
Must I then do it to them?

You are too absolute,
Though therein you can never be too Noble,
But when extremities speak. I have heard you say,
Honor and Policy, like vnseuer'd Friends,
IN the War do grow together: Grant that, and tell me
In Peace, what each of them by the other loose,
That they combine not there?

Tush, tush.


A good demand.


If it be Honor in your Wars, to seem
The same you are not, which for your best ends
You adopt your policy: How is it less or worse
That it shall hold Companionship in Peace
With Honor, as in War; since that to both
It stands in like request.

Why force you this?


Because, that
Now it lies you on to speak to the people:
Not by your own instruction, nor by' the matter
Which your heart prompts you, but with such words
That are but roated in your Tongue;
Though but Bastards, and Syllables
Of no allowance, to your bosoms truth.
Now, this no more dishonors you at all,
Then to take in a Town with gentle words,
Which else would put you to your fortune, and
The hazard of much blood.
I would dissemble with my Nature, where
My Fortunes and my Friends at stake, required
I should do so in Honor. I am in this
Your Wife, your Son: These Senators, the Nobles,
And you, will rather show our general Lowts,
How you can frown, then spend a fawn upon 'em,
For the inheritance of their loves, and safeguard
Of what that want might ruin.

Noble Lady,
Come go with us, speak fair: you may salve so,
Not what is dangerous present, but the loss
Of what is past.

I pry thee now, my Son,
Go to them, with this Bonnet in thy hand,
And thus far having stretched it (here be with them)
Thy Knee bussing the stones: for in such business
Action is eloquence, and the eyes of the ignorant
More learned then the ears, wauing thy head,
Which often thus correcting thy stout heart,
Now humble as the ripest Mulberry,
That will not hold the handling: or say to them,
Thou art their Soldier, and being bred in broils,
Have not the soft way, which thou do confess
Were fit for thee to use, as they to claim,
In asking their good loves, but thou will frame
Thy self (forsooth) hereafter theirs so far,
As thou have power and person.

This but done,
Even as she speaks, why their hearts were yours:
For they have Pardons, being asked, as free,
As words to little purpose.

Prithee now,
Go, and be ruled: although I know thou had rather
Follow thine Enemy in a fiery Gulf,
Then flatter him in a Bower.
Here is Cominius.

I have been in the Market place: and Sir it is fit
You make strong party, or defend your self
By calmness, or by absence: all is in anger.

Only fair speech.


I think 'twill serve, if he can thereto frame his spirit.


He must, and will:
Prithee now say you will, and go about it.

Must I go show them my vnbarb'd Sconce?
Must I with my base Tongue give to my Noble Heart
A Lie, that it must bear well? I will do it:
Yet were there but this single Plot, to loose
This Mould of Martius, they to dust should grind it,
And throw't against the Wind. Toth' Market place:
You have put me now to such a part, which never
I shall discharge toth' Life.

Come, come, we will prompt you.


I prithee now sweet Son, as thou have said
My praises made thee first a Soldier; so
To have my praise for this, perform a part
Thou have not done before.

Well, I must do it:
Away my disposition, and possess me
Some Harlots spirit: My throat of War be turned,
Which quier'd with my Drum into a Pipe,
Small as an Eunuch, or the Virgin voice
That Babies lull a-sleepe: The smiles of Knaves
Tent in my cheeks, and Schoole-boyes Tears take up
The Glasses of my sight: A Beggars Tongue
Make motion through my Lips, and my Armed knees
Who bowed but in my Stirrup, bend like his
That has received an Alms. I will not do it,
Leaft I surcease to honor mine own truth,
And by my Bodies action, teach my Mind
A most inherent Baseness.

At thy choice then:
To beg of thee, it is my more dishonor,
Then thou of them. Come all to ruin, let
Thy Mother rather feel thy Pride, then fear
Thy dangerous Stoutnesse: for I mock at death
With as big heart as thou. Do as thou list,
Thy Valiantness was mine, thou suck'st it from me:
But owe thy Pride thy self.

Pray be content:
Mother, I am going to the Market place:
Chide me no more. I Will Mountebanke their Loves,
Cogge their Hearts from them, and come home beloved
Of all the Trades in Rome. Look, I am going:
Commend me to my Wife, I Will return Consul,
Or never trust to what my Tongue can do
IN th way of Flattery further.

Do your will.


Away, the Tribunes do attend you: arm your self
To answer mildely: for they are prepared
With Accusations, as I hear more strong
Then are upon you yet.

The word is, Mildely. Pray you let us go,
Let them accuse me by invention: I
Will answer in mine Honor.

I, but mildely.


Well mildely be it then, Mildely.


In this point charge him home, that he affects
Tyrannical power: If he euade us there,
Enforce him with his envy to the people,
And that the Spoil got on the A^tiats
Was never distributed. What, will he come?

He Is coming.


How accompanied?


With old Menenius, and those Senators
That always favored him.

Have you a Catalogue
Of all the Voices that we have procured, set down by 'th Pole?

I have: it is ready.


Have you collected them by Tribes?


I have.


Assemble presently the people hither:
And when they hear me say, it shall be so,
IN the right and strength a' the Commons: be it either
For death, for fine, or Banishment, then let them
If I say Fine, cry Fine; if Death, cry Death,
Insisting on the old prerogative
And power in th Truth a' th Cause.

I shall inform them.


And when such time they have begun to cry,
Let them not cease, but with a dinne confused
Enforce the present Execution
Of what we chance to Sentence.

Very well.


Make them be strong, and ready for this hint
When we shall hap to giu't them.

Go about it,
Put him to Choler strait, he has been used
Ever to conquer, and to have his worth
Of contradiction. Being once chaft, he cannot
Be rein'd again to Temperance, then he speaks
What Is in his heart, and that is there which looks
With us to break his neck.

Well, here he comes.


Calmely, I do beseech you.


I, as an Hostler, that fourth poorest piece
Will bear the Knave by 'th Volume:
The honored Gods
Keep Rome in safety, and the Chaires of Justice
Supplied with worthy men, plant love amongs
Through our large Temples with ye shows of peace
And not our streets with War.

Amen, Amen.


A Noble wish.


Draw near ye people.


List to your Tribunes. Audience:
Peace I say.

First hear me speak.


Well, say: Peace hoe.


Shall I be charged no further then this present?
Must all determine here?

I do demand,
If you submit you to the peoples voices,
Allow their Officers, and are content
To suffer lawful Censure for such faults
As shall be proved upon you.

I am Content.


Lo Citizens, he says he is Content.
The warlike Service he has done, consider: Think
Upon the wounds his body bears, which show
Like Graves in th holy Churchyard.

Scratches with Briars, scarres to move
Laughter only.

Consider further:
That when he speaks not like a Citizen,
You find him like a Soldier: do not take
His rougher Actions for malicious sounds:
But as I say, such as become a Soldier,
Rather then envy you.

Well, well, no more.


What is the matter,
That being past for Consul with full voice:
I am so dishonored, that the very hour
You take it off again.

Answer to us.


Say then: it is true, I ought so


We charge you, that you have contrived to take
From Rome all seasoned Office, and to wind
Your self into a power tyrannical,
For which you are a Traitor to the people.

How? Traitor?


Nay temperately: your promise.


The fires in the lowest hell. Fould in the people:
Call me their Traitor, thou injurious Tribune.
Within thine eyes sat twenty thousand deaths
In thy hands clutcht: as many Millions in
Thy lying tongue, both numbers. I would say
Thou lie unto thee, with a voice as free,
As I do pray the Gods.

Mark you this people?


To' the Rock, to' the Rock with him.


Peace:
We need not put new matter to his charge:
What you have seen him do, and heard him speak:
Beating your Officers, cursing your selves,
Opposing Laws with strokes, and here defying
Those whose great power must try him.
Even this so criminal, and in such capital kind
Deserves the extremest death.

But since he has served well for Rome.


What do you prate of Service.


I talk of that, that know it.


You?


Is this the promise that you made your mother.


Know, I pray you.


I Will know no further:
Let them pronounce the steep Tarpeian death,
Vagabond exile, Fleaing, pent to linger
But with a grain a day, I would not buy
Their mercy, at the price of one fair word,
Nor check my Courage for what they can give,
To haue't with saying, Good morrow.

For that he has
(As much as in him lies) from time to time
Enui'd against the people; seeking means
To pluck away their power: as now at last,
Given Hostile strokes, and that not in the presence
Of dreaded Justice, but on the Ministers
That does distribute it. In the name a' the people,
And in the power of us the Tribunes, we
(Even from this instant) banish him our City
In peril of precipitation
From off the Rock Tarpeian, never more
To enter our Rome gates. IN the Peoples name,
I say it shall be so.

It shall be so, it shall be so: let him away:
He Is banished, and it shall be so.

Hear me my Masters, and my common friends.


He Is sentenced: No more hearing.


Let me speak:
I have been Consul, and can show from Rome
Her Enemies marks upon me. I do love
My Countries good, with a respect more tender,
More holy, and profound, then mine own life,
My dear Wives estimate, her wombes increase,
And treasure of my Loins: then if I would
Speak that.

We know your drift. Speak what?


There Is no more to be said, but he is banished
As Enemy to the people, and his Country.
It shall be so.

It shall be so, it shall be so.


You common cry of Curs, whose breath I hate,
As reeke a' the rotten Fennes: whose Loves I prize,
As the dead Carcasses of unburied men,
That do corrupt my Air: I banish you,
And here remain with your uncertainty.
Let every feeble Rumor shake your hearts:
Your Enemies, with nodding of their Plumes
Fan you into despair: Have the power still
To banish your Defenders, till at length
Your ignorance (which finds not till it feels,
Making but reservation of your selves,
Still your own Foes) deliver you
As most abated Captives, to some Nation
That won you without blows, despising
For you the City. Thus I turn my back;
There is a world elsewhere.

The peoples Enemy is gone, is gone.


Our enemy is banished, he is gone: Hoo, oo.


Go see him out at Gates, and follow him
As he has followed you, with all despite
Give him deserved vexation. Let a guard
Attend us through the City.

Come, come, lets see him out at gates, come:
The Gods preserve our Noble Tribunes, come.

Come leave your tears: a brief farwell: the beast
With many heads butts me away. Nay Mother,
Where is your ancient Courage? You were used
To say, Extreamities was the trier of spirits,
That common chances. Common men could bear,
That when the Sea was calm, all Boats alike
Showed Mastership in floating. Fortunes blows,
When most struck home, being gentle wounded, craves
A Noble cunning. You were used to load me
With Precepts that would make invincible
The heart that conn'd them.

Oh heavens! O heavens!


Nay, I prithee woman.


Now the Red Pestilence strike al Trades in Rome,
And Occupations perish.

What, what, what:
I shall be loved when I am lacked. Nay Mother,
Resume that Spirit, when you were wont to say,
If you had been the Wife of Hercules.
Six of his Labors youl'd have done, and saved
Your Husband so much swet. Cominius,
Droope not, Adieu: Farewell my Wife, my Mother,
I Will do well yet. Thou old and true Menenius,
Thy tears are salter then a younger man's,
And venomous to thine eyes. My (sometime) General,
I have seen the Stern, and thou have often beheld
Heart-hardning spectacles. Tell these sad women,
It Is fond to wail inevitable strokes,
As it is to laugh at 'em My Mother, you wot well
My hazards still have been your solace, and
Beleeu't not lightly, though I go alone
Like to a lonely Dragon, that his Fenne
Makes feared, and talked of more then seen: your Son
Will or exceed the Common, or be caught
With cautelous baits and practice.

My first son,
Whether will thou go? Take good Cominius
With thee a while: Determine on some course
More then a wild exposture, to each chance
That start's in the way before thee.

O the Gods!


I Will follow thee a Month, devise with thee
Where thou shall rest, that thou may hear of us,
And we of thee. So if the time thrust forth
A cause for thy Repeal, we shall not send
Over the vast world, to seek a single man,
And loose advantage, which does ever cool
I the absence of the needer.

Fare ye well:
Thou have years upon thee, and thou art too full
Of the wars surfets, to go roue with one
That Is yet vnbruis'd: bring me but out at gate.
Come my sweet wife, my dearest Mother, and
My Friends of Noble touch: when I am forth,
Bid me farewell, and smile. I pray you come:
While I remain above the ground, you shall
Hear from me still, and never of me ought
But what is like me formerly.

That Is worthily
As any ear can hear. Come, let us not weep,
If I could shake off but one seven years
From these old arms and legs, by the good Gods
I Would with thee, every foot.

Give me thy hand, come.


Bid them all home, he is gone: and we will no further,
The Nobility are vexed, whom we see have sided
In his behalf.

Now we have shown our power,
Let us seem humbler after it is done,
Then when it was a doing.

Bid them home: say their great enemy is gone,
And they, stand in their ancient strength.

Dismiss them home. Here comes his Mother.


Let Us not meet her.


Why?


They say she is mad.


They have taken note of us: keep on your way.


Oh y' are well met:
The hoorded plague a' the Gods requit your love.

Peace, peace, be not so loud.


If that I could for weeping, you should hear,
Nay, and you shall hear some. Will you be gone?

You shall stay too: I would I had the power
To say so to my Husband.

Are you mankind?


I fool, is that a shame. Note but this Fool,
Was not a man my Father? Had thou Foxship
To banish him that struck more blows for Rome
Then thou have spoken words.

Oh blessed Heavens!


More Noble blows, then ever you wise words.
And for Romes good, I Will tell thee what: yet go:
Nay but thou shall stay too: I would my Son
Were in Arabia, and thy Tribe before him,
His good Sword in his hand.

What then?


What then? Hee'ld make an end of thy posterity


Bastards, and all.
Good man, the Wounds that he does bear for Rome!

Come, come, peace.


I would he had continued to his Country
As he began, and not unknit himself
The Noble knot he made.

I would he had.


I would he had? 'Twas you incenst the rabble.
Cats, that can judge as fitly of his worth,
As I can of those Mysteries which heaven
Will not have earth to know.

Pray let us go.


Now pray sir get you gone.
You have done a brave deed: Ere you go, hear this:
As far as does the Capitol exceed
The meanest house in Rome; so far my Son
This Ladies Husband here; this (do you see)
Whom you have banished, does exceed you all.

Well, well, we will leave you.


Why stay we to be baited
With one that wants her Wits.

Take my Prayers with you.
I would the Gods had nothing else to do,
But to confirm my Cursses. Could I meet 'em
But once a day, it would vnclogge my heart
Of what lies heavy to it.

You have told them home,
And by my troth you have cause: you will Sup with me.

Angers my Meat: I suppe upon my self,
And so shall sterue with Feeding: Come, let us go,
Leave this faint-puling, and lament as I do,
In Anger, Iuno-like: Come, come, come.

Fie, fie, fie.


I know you well sir, and you know me: your name I think is Adrian.


It is so sir, truly I have forgot you.


I am a Roman, and my Services are as you are, against 'em. Know you me yet.


Nicanor: no.


The same sir.


You had more Beard when I last saw you, but your Favor is well appeared by
your Tongue. What Is the News in Rome: I have a Note from the Volcean state to
find you out there. You have well saved me a days journey


There has been in Rome strange Insurrections: The people, against the
Senators, Patricians, and Nobles


Has bin; is it ended then? Our State thinks not so, they are in a most
warlike preparation, and hope to com upon them, in the heat of their diuisio


The maine blaze of it is past, but a small thing would make it flame again.
For the Nobles receive so to heart, the Banishment of that worthy Coriolanus,
that they are in a ripe aptness, to take al power from the people, and to
pluck from them their Tribunes for ever. This lies glowing I can tell you, and
is almost mature for the violent breaking out


Coriolanus Banished?


Banished sir.


You will be welcome with this intelligence Nicanor.


The day serves well for them now. I have heard it said, the fittest time to
corrupt a man's Wife, is when she is fallen out with her Husband. Your Noble
Tullus Auffidius well appear well in these Wars, his great Opposer
Coriolanus being now in no request of his country


He cannot choose: I am most fortunate, thus accidentally to encounter you. You
have ended my Business, and I will merrily accompany you home


I shall between this and Supper, tell you most strange things from Rome: all
tending to the good of their Adversaries. Have you an Army ready say you


A most Royal one: The Centurions, and their charges distinctly billetted
already in the entertainment, and to be on foot at an hours warning


I am joyful to hear of their readiness, and am the man I think, that shall
set them in present Action. So sir, heartily well met, and most glad of your
Company


You take my part from me sir, I have the most cause to be glad of yours.


Well, let us go together.


A goodly City is this Antium* City,
It Is I that made thy Widows: Many an heir
Of these fair Edifices fore my Wars
Have I heard groan, and drop: Then know me not,
Least that thy Wives with Spits, and Boys with stones
In puny Battle slay me. Save you sir.

And you.


Direct me, if it be your will, where great Auffidius lies: Is he in Antium?


He is, and Feasts the Nobles of the State, at his house this night.


Which is his house, beseech you?


This here before you.


Thank you sir, farewell.
Oh World, thy slippery turns! Friends now fast sworn,
Whose double bosoms seems to wear one heart,
Whose Hours, whose Bed, whose Meal and Exercise
Are still together: who Twin (as 'twere) in Love,
Inseperable, shall within this hour,
On a dissension of a Doit, break out
To bitterest Enmity: So fellest Foes,
Whose Passions, and whose Plots have broke their sleep
To take the one the other, by some chance,
Some trick not worth an Egg, shall grow dear friends
And inter-ioyne their yssues. So with me,
My Birthplace have I, and my loves upon
This Enemy Town: I Will enter, if he slay me
He does fair Justice: if he give me way,
I Will do his Country Service.

Wine, Wine, Wine: What service is here? I think our Fellows are asleep.


Where Is Cotus: my M. calls for him: Cotus.


A goodly House:
The Feast smells well: but I appear not like a Guest.

What would you have Friend? whence are you?
Here Is no place for you: Pray go to the door?

I have deserved no better entertainment, in being Coriolanus.


Whence are you sir? Has the Porter his eyes in his head, that he gives
entrance to such Companions? Pray get you out


Away.


Away? Get you away.


Now the art troublesome.


Are you so brave: I Will have you talked with anon


What Fellows this?


A strange one as ever I looked on: I cannot get him out of the house: Prithee
call my Master to him


What have you to do here fellow? Pray you avoid the house.


Let me but stand, I will not hurt your Harth.


What are you?


A Gentleman.


A maru'llous poor one.


True, so I am.


Pray you poor Gentleman, take up some other station: Here Is no place for
you, pray you avoid: Come


Follow your Function, go, and batten on cold bits.


What you will not? Prithee tell my Master what a strange Guest he has here.


And I shall.


Where dwel'st thou?


Under the Canopy.


Under the Canopy?


I.


Where Is that?


IN th City of Kites and Crows.


IN th City of Kites and Crows? What an Ass it is, then thou dwel'st with
Dawes too


No, I serve not thy Master.


How sir? Do you meddle with my Master?


I, it is an honester service, then to meddle with thy Mistress: Thou prat'st, and
prat'st, serve with thy trencher: Hence


Where is this Fellow?


Here sir, I Would have beaten him like a dog, but for disturbing the Lords
within


Whence come thou? What woldst you? Thy name?
Why speak not? Speak man: What Is thy name?

If Tullus not yet thou know me, and seeing me, do not think me for the
man I am, necessity commands me name my self


What is thy name?


A name vnmusicall to the Volcians cares,
And harsh in sound to thine.

Say, what is thy name?
Thou have a Grim appearance, and thy Face
Bears a Command in it: Though thy Tackles torn,
Thou show a Noble Vessel: What Is thy name?

Prepare thy brow to frown: know you me yet?


I know thee not? Thy Name?


My name is Caius Martius, who has done
To thee particularly, and to all the Volces
Great hurt and Mischief: thereto witness may
My Surname Coriolanus. The painful Service,
The extreme Dangers, and the drops of Blood
Shed for my thanklesse Country, are requitted:
But with that Surname, a good memory
And witness of the Malice and Displeasure
Which thou should bear me, only that name remains.
The Cruelty and Envy of the people,
Permitted by our dastard Nobles, who
Have all forsook me, has devoured the rest:
And suffered me by the voice of Slaves to be
Hoop'd out of Rome. Now this extremity,
Has brought me to thy Harth, not out of Hope
(Mistake me not) to save my life: for if
I had feared death, of all the Men in the World
I would have voided thee. But in mere spite
To be full quit of those my Banishers,
Stand I before thee here: Then if thou have
A heart of wreake in thee, that wilt revenge
Thine own particular wrongs, and stop those maimes
Of shame seen through thy Country, speed thee straight
And make my misery serve thy turn: So use it,
That my reuengefull Services may prove
As Benefits to thee. For I will fight
Against my Cankred Country, with the Spleen
Of all the under Fiends. But if so be,
Thou dare not this, and that to prove more Fortunes
The art tired, then in a word, I also am
Longer to live most weary: and present
My throat to thee, and to thy Ancient Malice:
Which not to cut, would show thee but a Fool,
Since I have ever followed thee with hate,
Drawn Tons of Blood out of thy Countries breast,
And cannot live but to thy shame, unless
It be to do thee service.

Oh Martius, Martius;
Each word thou have spoke, has weeded from my heart
A root of Ancient Envy. If Jupiter
Should from yond clowd speak divine things,
And say it is true; I Would not believe them more
Then thee all-Noble Martius. Let me twine
Mine arms about that body, where against
My grained Ash an hundred times has broke,
And scarr'd the Moon with splinters: here I cleep
The Anuile of my Sword, and do contest
As hotly, and as Nobly with thy Love,
As ever in Ambitious strength, I did
Contend against thy Valor. Know thou first,
I loved the Maid I married: never man
Sighed truer breath. But that I see thee here
Thou Noble thing, more dances my rapt heart,
Then when I first my wedded Mistress saw
Bestride my Threshold. Why, thou Mars I tell thee,
We have a Power on foot: and I had purpose
Once more to hew thy Target from thy Brawne,
Or loose mine Arm for it: Thou have beat me out
Twelve several times, and I have nightly since
Dreamt of encounters 'twixt thy self and me:
We have been down together in my sleep,
Vnbuckling Helmes, fisting each others Throat,
And waked half dead with nothing. Worthy Martius,
Had we no other quarrel else to Rome, but that
Thou art thence Banished, we would muster all
From twelve, to seventy: and pouring War
Into the bowels of ungrateful Rome,
Like a bold Flood o're-beate. Oh come, go in,
And take our Friendly Senators by' the hands
Who now are here, taking their leaves of me,
Who am prepared against your Territories,
Though not for Rome it self.

You bless me Gods.


Therefore most absolute Sir, if thou will have
The leading of thine own Reuenges, take
The one half of my Commission, and set down
As best thou art experienced, since thou know
Thy Countries strength and weakness, thine own ways
Whether to knock against the Gates of Rome,
Or rudely visit them in parts remote,
To fright them, ere destroy. But come in,
Let me commend thee first, to those that shall
Say yea to thy desires. A thousand welcomes,
And more a Friend, then ere an Enemy,
Yet Martius that was much. Your hand: most welcome.

Here Is a strange alteration?


By my hand, I had thought to have stricken him with a Cudgel, and yet my mind
gave me, his clothes made a false report of him


What an Arm he has, he turned me about with his finger and his thumb, as one
would set up a Top


Nay, I knew by his face that there was something in him. He had fir, a kind
of face me thought, I cannot tell how to term it


He had so, looking as it were, would I were hanged but I thought there was
more in him, then I could think


So did I, I Will be sworn: He is simply the rarest man in the world.


I think he is: but a greater soldier then he,
You wot one.

Who my Master?


Nay, it is no matter for that.


Worth six on him.


Nay not so neither: but I take him to be the greater Soldier.


Faith look you, one cannot tell how to say that: for the Defense of a Town,
our General is excellent


I, and for an assault too.


Oh Slaves, I can tell you News, News you Rascals


What, what, what? Let Us partake.


I would not be a Roman of all Nations; I had as live be a condemned man.


Wherefore? Wherefore?


Why here is he that was wont to thwacke our General, Caius Martius.


Why do you say, thwacke our General?


I do not say thwacke our General, but he was always good enough for him*


Come we are fellows and friends: he was ever too hard for him, I have heard
him say so himself


He was too hard for him directly, to say the Troth on it before Corioles, he
scotcht him, and notcht him like a Carbinado


And he had bin Cannibally given, he might have boyld and eaten him too.


But more of thy News.


Why he is so made on here within, as if he were Son and Heir to Mars, set
at upper end of the Table: No question asked him by any of the Senators, but
they stand bald before him. Our General himself makes a Mistress of him,
Sanctifies himself with his hand, and turns up the white of the eye to his
Discourse. But the bottom of the News is, our General is cut in the middle,
and but one half of what he was yesterday. For the other has half, by the
entreaty and grant of the whole Table. He Will go he says, and sole the Porter
of Rome Gates by the ears. He will mow all down before him, and leave his
passage poul'd


And he is as like to do it, as any man I can imagine.


Do It? he will do it: for look you sir, he has as many Friends as Enemies:
which Friends sir as it were, durst not (look you sir) show themselves (as we
term it) his Friends, whilst he is in Directitude


Directitude? What Is that?


But when they shall see sir, his Crest up again, and the man in blood, they
will out of their Burroughes (like Conies after Rain) and revel all with him


But when goes this forward:


To morrow, to day, presently, you shall have the Drum struck up this
afternoon: It Is as it were a parcel of their Feast, and to be executed ere
they wipe their lips


Why then we shall have a stirring World again: This peace is nothing, but to
rust Iron, increase Tailors, and breed Ballad-makers


Let me have War say I, it exceeds peace as far as day does night: It Is
sprightly walking, audible, and full of Vent. Peace, is a very Apoplexy,
Lethargy, mull'd, deaf, sleep, insensible, a getter of more bastard.
Children, then wars a destroyer of men


It Is so, and as wars in some sort may be said to be a Rauishen, so it
cannot be denied, but peace is a great maker of Cuckolds


I, and it makes men hate one another.


Reason, because they then less need one another: The Wars for my money. I
hope to see Romans as cheap as Volcians. They are rising, they are rising


In, in, in, in.


We hear not of him, neither need we fear him,
His remedies are tame, the present peace,
And quietness of the people, which before
Were in wild hurry. Here do we make his Friend^
Blush, that the world goes well: who rather had,
Though they themselves did suffer by it, behold
Dissentious numbers pestring streets, then see
Our Tradesmen singing in their shops, and going
About their Functions friendly.

We stood to it in good time. Is this Menenius?


It Is he, it is he: O he is grown most kind of late: Hail Sir.


Hail to you both.


Your Coriolanus is not much mist, but with his Friends: the Commonwealth does
stand, and so would do, were he more angry at it


All Is well, and might have been much better, if he could have temporiz'd.


Where is he, hear you?


Nay I hear nothing:
His Mother and his wife, hear nothing from him.

The Gods preserve you both.


Gooden our Neighbors.


Gooden to you all, gooden to you all.


Our selves, our wives, and children, on our knees,
Are bound to pray for you both.

Live, and thrive.


Farewell kind Neighhours:
We wished Coriolanus had loved you as we did.

Now the Gods keep you.


Farewell, farewell.


This is a happier and more comely time,
Then when these Fellows ran about the streets,
Crying Confusion.

Caius Martius was
A worthy Officer in the War, but Insolent,
Overcome with Pride, Ambitious, past all thinking
Selfe-louing.

And affecting one sole Throne, without assistance


I think not so.


We should by this, to all our Lamention,
If he had gone forth Consul, found it so.

The Gods have well prevented it, and Rome
Sits safe and still, without him.

Worthy Tribunes,
There is a Slave whom we have put in prison,
Reports the Volces with two several Powers
Are entered in the Roman Territories,
And with the deepest malice of the War,
Destroy, what lies before 'em.

It Is Auffidius,
Who hearing of our Martius Banishment,
Thrusts forth his horns again into the world
Which were In-shell'd, when Martius stood for Rome,
And durst not once peep out.

Come, what talk you of Martius.


Go see this Rumorer whipped, it cannot be,
The Volces dare break with us.

Cannot be?
We have Record, that very well it can,
And three examples of the like, has been
Within my Age. But reason with the fellow
Before you punish him, where he heard this,
Least you shall chance to whip your Information,
And beat the Messenger, who bids beware
Of what is to be dreaded.

Tell not me: I know this cannot be.


Not possible.


The Nobles in great earnestness are going
All to the Senate House: some news is coming
That turns their Countenances.

It Is this Slave:
Go whip him fore the peoples eyes: His raising,
Nothing but his report.

Yes worthy Sir,
The Slaves report is seconded, and more
More fearful is delivered.

What more fearful?


It is spoke freely out of many mouths,
How probable I do not know, that Martius
Joined with Auffidius, leads a power against Rome,
And vows Revenge as spacious, as between
The yong'st and oldest thing.

This is most likely.


Raised only, that the weaker sort may wish
Good Martius home again.

The very trick on it.


This is unlikely,
He, and Auffidius can no more atone
Then violent'st Contrariety.

You are sent for to the Senate:
A fearful Army, led by Caius Martius,
Associated with Auffidius, Rages
Upon our Territories, and have already
O're-borne their way, consumed with fire, and took
What lay before them.

Oh you have made good work.


What news? What news?


You have holp to ravish your own daughters, and
To melt the City Leads upon your pates,
To see your Wives dishonored to your Noses.

What Is the news? What Is the news?


Your Temples burned in their Ciment, and
Your Franchises, whereon you stood, confined
Into an Augors boar.

Pray now, your News:
You have made fair work I fear me: pray your news,
If Martius should be joined with Volceans.

If? He is their God, he leads them like a thing
Made by some other Deity then Nature,
That shapes man Better: and they follow him
Against us Brats, with no less Confidence,
Then Boys pursuing Summer Butter-flies,
Or Butchers killing Flies.

You have made good work,
You and your Apron men: you, that stood so much
Upon the voice of occupation, and
The breath of Garlicke-eaters.

He I shake your Rome about your ears.


As Hercules did shake down Mellow Fruit*
You have made fair work.

But is this true sir?


I, and you will look pale
Before you find it other. All the Regions
Do smilingly Revolt, and who resists
Are mocked for valiant Ignorance,
And perish constant Fools: who is it can blame him?
Your Enemies and his, find something in him.

We are all undone, unless
The Noble man have mercy.

Who shall ask it?
The Tribunes cannot do it for shame; the people
Deserve such pity of him, as the Wolf
Does of the Shepherds: For his best Friends, if they
Should say be good to Rome, they charged him, even
As those should do that had deserved his hate,
And therein showed like Enemies.

It Is true, if he were putting to my house, the brand
That should consume it, I have not the face
To say, beseech you cease. You have made fair hands,
You and your Crafts, you have crafted fair.

You have brought
A Trembling upon Rome, such as was never
S'incapeable of help.

Say not, we brought it.


How? Was It we? We loved him,
But like Beasts, and Cowardly Nobles,
Gave way unto your Clusters, who did hoote
Him out of the City.

But I fear
They Will roar him in again. Tullus Auffidius,
The second name of men, obeyes his points
As if he were his Officer: Desperation,
Is all the Policy, Strength, and Defense
That Rome can make against them.

Here come the Clusters.
And is Auffidius with him? You are they
That made the Air unwholesome, when you cast
Your stinking, greasy Caps, in hooting
At Coriolanus Exile. Now he is coming,
And not a hair upon a Soldiers head
Which will not prove a whip: As many Coxcombes
As you threw Caps up, will he tumble down,
And pay you for your voices. It Is no matter,
If he could burn us all into one coal,
We have deserved it.

Faith, we hear fearful News.


For mine own part.
When I said banish him, I said 'twas pity.

And so did I.


And so did I: and to say the truth, so did very many of us, that we did we did
for the best, and though we willingly consented to his Banishment, yet it was
against our will


Y' are goodly things, you Voices.


You have made good work
You and your cry. Shal's to the Capitol?

Oh I, what else?


Go Masters get you home, be not dismayed,
These are a Side, that would be glad to have
This true, which they so seem to fear. Go home,
And show no sign of Fear.

The Gods be good to us: Come Masters let us home, I ever said we were in th
wrong, when we banished him


So did we all. But come, let us home.


I do not like this News.


Nor I.


Let Us to the Capitol: would half my wealth
Would buy this for a lie.

Pray let us go.


Do they still fly to' the Roman?


I do not know what Witchcraft's in him: but
Your Soldiers use him as the Grace before meat,
Their talk at Table, and their Thanks at end,
And you are darkened in this action Sir,
Even by your own.

I cannot help it now,
Unless by using means I lame the foot
Of our design. He bears himself more proudlier,
Even to my person, then I thought he would
When first I did embrace him. Yet his Nature
In that is no Changeling, and I must excuse
What cannot be amended.

Yet I wish Sir,
(I mean for your particular) you had not
Joined in Commission with him: but either have borne
The action of your self, or else to him, had left it soly.

I understand thee well, and be thou sure
When he shall come to his account, he knows not
What I can urge against him, although it seems
And so he thinks, and is no less apparent
To the vulgar eye, that he bears all things fairly:
And shewe^ good Husbandry for the Volcian State,
Fights Dragon-like, and does atcheeue as soon
As draw his Sword: yet he has left undone
That which shall break his neck, or hazard mine,
When ere we come to our account.

Sir, I beseech you, think you he will carry Rome?


All places yields to him ere he sits down,
And the Nobility of Rome are his:
The Senators and Patricians love him too:
The Tribunes are no Soldiers: and their people
Will be as rash in the repeal, as hasty
To expel him thence. I think he will be to Rome
As is the Aspray to the Fish, who takes it
By Sovereignty of Nature. First, he was
A Noble servant to them, but he could not
Carry his Honors eeuen: whether 'was Pride
Which out of daily Fortune ever taints
The happy man; whether detect of judgment,
To fail in the disposing of those chances
Which he was Lord of: or whether Nature,
Not to be other then one thing, not moving
From the Caske to the Cushion: but commanding peace
Even with the same austerity and garb,
As he controlled the war. But one of these
(As he has spices of them all) not all,
For I dare so far free him, made him feared,
So hated, and so banished: but he has a Merit
To choke it in the vtt'rance: So our Virtue,
Lie in the interpretation of the time,
And power unto it self most commendable,
Has not a Tomb so evident as a Chair
TO extol what it has done.
One fire drives out one fire; one Nail, one Nail;
Rights by rights fouler, strengths by strengths do fail.
Come let us away: when Caius Rome is thine,
Thou art poor'st of all; then shortly art thou mine.

No, I Will not go: you hear what he has said
Which was sometime his General: who loved him
In a most dear particular. He called me Father:
But what o'that? Go you that banished him
A Mile before his Tent, fall down, and knee
The way into his mercy: Nay, if he coy'd
To hear Cominius speak, I Will keep at home.

He would not seem to know me.


Do you hear?


Yet one time he did call me by my name:
I urged our old acquaintance, and the drops
That we have bled together. Coriolanus
He would not answer too: Forbad all Names,
He was a kind of Nothing, Titlelesse,
Till he had forged himself a name a' the fire
Of burning Rome.

Why so: you have made good work:
A pair of Tribunes, that have wracked for Rome,
To make Coals cheap: A Noble memory.

I minded him, how Royal 'twas to pardon
When it was less expected. He replied
It was a bare petition of a State
To one whom they had punished.

Very well, could he say less.


I offered to awaken his regard
For's private Friends. His answer to me was
He could not stay to pick them, in a pile
Of noisome musty Chafe. He said, 'twas folly
For one poor grain or two, to leave unburned
And still to nose the offense.

For one poor grain or two?
I am one of those: his Mother, Wife, his Child,
And this brave Fellow too: we are the Grains,
You are the musty Chafe, and you are smelt
Above the Moon. We must be burnt for you.

Nay, pray be patient: If you refuse your aid
In this so neuer-needed help, yet do not
Vpbraid's with our distress. But sure if you
Would be your Countries Pleader, your good tongue
More then the instant Army we can make
Might stop our Countryman.

No: I Will not meddle.


Pray you go to him.


What should I do?


Only make trial what your Love can do,
For Rome, toward Martius.

Well, and say that Martius return me,
As Cominius is returned, unheard: what then?
But as a discontented Friend, greefe-shot
With his unkindness. Say It be so?

Yet your good will
Must have that thanks from Rome, after the measure
As you intended well.

I Will vndertak't:
I think he will hear me. Yet to bite his lip,
And humme at good Cominius, much vnhearts me.
He was not taken well, he had not dined,
The Veins vnfill'd, our blood is cold, and then
We powt upon the Morning, are unapt
To give or to forgive; but when we have stufft
These Pipes, and these Conueyances of our blood
With Wine and Feeding, we have suppler Souls
Then in our Priest-like Fasts: therefore I Will watch him
Till he be dieted to my request,
And then I Will set upon him.

You know the very rode into his kindness,
And cannot lose your way.

Good faith I Will prove him,
Speed how it will. I shall ere long, have knowledge
Of my success.

He Will never hear him.


Not.


I tell you, he does sit in Gold, his eye
Red as 'twould burn Rome: and his Injury
The Jailer to his pity. I kneeled before him,
'Twas very faintly he said Rise: dismissed me
Thus with his speechless hand. What he would do
He sent in writing after me: what he would not,
Bound with an Oath to yield to his conditions:
So that all hope is vain, unless his Noble Mother,
And his Wife, who (as I hear) mean to solicit him
For mercy to his Country: therefore let us hence,
And with our fair entreaties have them on.

Stay: whence are you.


Stand, and go back.


You guard like men, it is well. But by your leave,
I am an Officer of State, and come to speak with Coriolanus

From whence?


From Rome.


You may not pass, you must return: our General will no more hear from
thence


You Will see your Rome embraced with fire, before
You Will speak with Coriolanus.

Good my Friends,
If you have heard your General talk of Rome,
And of his Friends there, it is Lots to Blankes,
My name has touched your ears: it is Menenius.

Be it so, go back: the virtue of your name,
Is not here passable.

I tell thee Fellow,
Thy General is my Lover: I have been
The book of his good Acts, whence men have read
His Fame vnparolell'd, happily amplified:
For I have ever verified my Friends*
(Of whom he is chief) with all the size that verity
Would without lapsing suffer* Nay, sometimes,
Like to a Bowl upon a subtle ground
I have tumbled past the throw: and in his praise
Have (almost) stamped the Leasing. Therefore Fellow,
I must have leave to pass.

Faith Sir, if you had told as many lies in his behalf, as you have uttered
words in your own, you should not pass here: no, though it were as virtuous
to lie, as to live chastely. Therefore go back


Prithee fellow, remember my name is Menenius, always factionary on the party
of your General


Howsoever you have bin his Lier, as you say you have, I am one that telling
true under him, must say you cannot pass. Therefore go back


Has he dined can thou tell? For I would not speak with him, till after
dinner


You are a Roman, are you?


I am as thy General is.


Then you should hate Rome, as he does. Can you, when you have pusht out your
gates, the very Defender of them, and in a violent popular ignorance, given
your enemy your shield, think to front his reuenges with the easy groans of
old women, the Virginal Palms of your daughters, or with the palsied
intercession of such a decayed Dotant as you seem to be? Can you think to blow
out the intended fire, your City is ready to flame in, with such weak breath
as this? No, you are deceived, therefore back to Rome, and prepare for your
execution: you are condemned, our General has sworn you out of repreeue and
pardon


Sir, if thy Captain knew I were here,
He would use me with estimation.

Come, my Captain knows you not.


I mean thy General.


My General cares not for you. Back I say, go: least I let forth your half
pint of blood. Back, that is the utmost of your having, back


Nay but Fellow, Fellow.


What Is the matter?


Now you Companion: I Will say an arrant for you: you shall know now that I am in
estimation: you shall perceive, that a Jack gardant cannot office me from my
Son Coriolanus, guess but my entertainment with him: if thou stand'st not in
th state of hanging, or of some death more long in Spectatorship, and crueller
in suffering, behold now presently, and swoond for what is to come upon thee.
The glorious Gods sit in hourly Synod about thy particular prosperity, and
love thee no worse then thy old Father Menenius does. O my Son, my Soul thou
art preparing fire for us: look thee, here is water to quench it. I was hardly
moved to come to thee: but being assured none but my self could move thee, I
have been blown out of your Gates with sighs: and conjure thee to pardon
Rome, and thy petitionary Countrymen. The good Gods assuage thy wrath, and
turn the dregs of it, upon this Varlet here: This, who like a block has
denied my access to thee


Away.


How? Away?


Wife, Mother, Child, I know not. My affairs
Are Seruanted to others: Though I owe
My Revenge properly, my remission lies
In Volcean breasts. That we have been familiar,
Ingrate forgetfulness shall poison rather
Then pity: Note how much, therefore be gone.
Mine ears against your suites, are stronger then
Your gates against my force. Yet for I loved thee,
Take this along, I writ it for thy sake,
And would have sent it. Another word Menenius,
I will not hear thee speak. This man Auffidius
Was my beloved in Rome: yet thou behold'st.

You keep a constant temper.


Now sir, is your name Menenius?


It Is a spell you see of much power:
You know the way home again.

Do you hear how we are shent for keeping your greatness back?


What cause do you think I have to swoond?


I neither care for the world, nor your General: for such things as you. I can
scarce think there is any, y' are so slight. He that has a will to die by
himself, fears it not from another: Let your General do his worst. For you,
be that you are, long; and your misery increase with your age. I say to you,
as I was said to, Away


A Noble Fellow I warrant him.


The worthy Fellow is our General. He Is the Rock,
The Oak not to be winde-shaken.

We will before the walls of Rome to morrow
Set down our Host. My partner in this Action,
You must report to the Volcian Lords, how plainly
I have borne this Business.

Only their ends you have respected,
Stopped your ears against the general suite of Rome:
Never admitted a private whisper, no not with such friends
That thought them sure of you.

This last old man,
Whom with a cracked heart I have sent to Rome,
Loved me, above the measure of a Father,
Nay godded me indeed. Their latest refuge
Was to send him: for whose old Love I have
(Though I showed sowrely to him) once more offered
The first Conditions which they did refuse,
And cannot now accept, to grace him only,
That thought he could do more: A very little
I have yielded too. Fresh Embasses, and Suites,
Nor from the State, nor private friends hereafter
Will I lend ear to. Ha? what shout is this? Shout within
Shall I be tempted to infringe my vow
In the same time it is made? I will not.
My wife comes foremost, then the honored mould
Wherein this Trunk was framed, and in her hand
The Grandchilde to her blood. But out affection,
All bond and privilege of Nature break;
Let it be Virtuous to be Obstinate.
What is that Curt'sie worth? Or those Doves eyes,
Which can make Gods forsworn? I melt, and am not
Of stronger earth then others: my Mother bows,
As if Olympus to a Molehill should
In supplication Nod: and my young Boy
Has an Aspect of intercession, which
Great Nature cries, Deny not. Let the Volces
Plough Rome, and harrow Italy, I Will never
Be such a Gosling to obey instinct: but stand
As if a man were Author of himself, and knew no other kin

My Lord and Husband.


These eyes are not the same I wore in Rome.


The sorrow that delivers us thus changed,
Makes you think so.

Like a dull Actor now, I have forgot my part,
And I am out, even to a full Disgrace. Best of my Flesh,
Forgive my Tyranny: but do not say,
For that forgive our Romans. O a kiss
Long as my Exile, sweet as my Revenge!
Now by the jealous Queen of Heaven, that kiss
I carried from thee dear; and my true Lip
Has Virgin'd it ere since. You Gods, I pray,
And the most noble Mother of the world
Leave unsaluted: Sink my knee in the earth,
Of thy deep duty, more impression show
Then that of common Sons.

Oh stand up blessed!
Whilst with no softer Cushion then the Flint
I kneel before thee, and improperly
Show duty as mistaken, all this while,
Between the Child, and Parent.

What Is this? your knees to me?
To your Corrected Son?
Then let the Pibbles on the hungry beach
Fillop the Stars: Then, let the mutinous winds
Strike the proud Cedars against the fiery Sun:
Murdering Impossibility, to make
What cannot be, slight work.

Thou art my Warrior, I hope to frame thee
Do you know this Lady?

The Noble Sister of Publicola;
The Moon of Rome: Chaste as the Isicle
That Is curdied by the Frost, from purest Snow,
And hangs on Dians Temple: Dear Valeria.

This is a poor Epitome of yours,
Which by the interpretation of full time,
May show like all your self.

The God of Soldiers:
With the consent of supreme Jove, inform
Thy thoughts with Nobleness, that thou may prove
To shame vnvulnerable, and stick in th Wars
Like a great Sea-marke standing every flaw,
And saving those that eye thee.

Your knee, Sirrah.


That Is my brave Boy.


Even he, your wife, this Lady, and my self,
Are Suitors to you.

I beseech you peace:
Or if you would ask, remember this before;
The thing I have forsworn to grant, may never
Be held by you denials. Do not bid me
Dismiss my Soldiers, or capitulate
Again, with Romes Mechanickes. Tell me not
Wherein I seem unnatural: Desire not to allay
My Rages and Reuenges, with your colder reasons.

Oh no more, no more:
You have said you will not grant us any thing:
For we have nothing else to ask, but that
Which you deny already: yet we will ask,
That if you fail in our request, the blame
May hang upon your hardness, therefore hear us.

Auffidius, and you Volces mark, for we will
Hear naught from Rome in private. Your request?

Should we be silent and not speak, our Raiment
And state of Bodies would bewray what life
We have led since thy Exile. Think with thy self,
How more unfortunate then all living women
Are we come hither; since that thy sight, which should
Make our eyes flow with joy, hearts dance with comforts,
Constraines them weep, and shake with fear and sorrow,
Making the Mother, wife, and Child to see,
The Son, the Husband, and the Father tearing
His Countries Bowels out; and to poor we
Thine enmities most capital: Thou barr'st us
Our prayers to the Gods, which is a comfort
That all but we enjoy. For how can we?
Alas! how can we, for our Country pray?
Whereto we are bound, together with thy victory:
Whereto we are bound: Alack, or we must loose
The Country our dear Nurse, or else thy person
Our comfort in the Country. We must find
An evident Calamity, though we had
Our wish, which side should win. For either thou
Must as a Foreign Recreant be led
With Manacles through our streets, or else
Triumphantly tread on thy Countries ruin,
And bear the Palm, for having bravely shed
Thy Wife and Childrens blood: For my self, Son,
I purpose not to wait on Fortune, till
These wars determine: If I cannot persuade thee,
Rather to show a Noble grace to both parts,
Then seek the end of one; thou shall no sooner
March to assault thy Country, then to tread
(Trust to it, thou shall not) on thy Mothers womb
That brought thee to this world.

I, and mine, that brought you forth this boy,
To keep your name living to time.

A shall not tread on me: I Will run away
Till I am bigger, but then I Will sight.

Not of a woman's tenderness to be,
Requires nor Child, nor woman's face to see:
I have sat too long.

Nay, go not from us thus:
If it were so, that our request did tend
To save the Romans, thereby to destroy
The Volces whom you serve, you might condemn us
As poisonous of your Honor. No, our suite
Is that you reconcile them: While the Volces
May say, this mercy we have showed: the Romans,
This we received, and each in either side
Give the All-haile to thee, and cry be Blessed
For making up this peace. Thou know (great Son)
The end of Wars uncertain: but this certain,
That if thou conquer Rome, the benefit
Which thou shall thereby reap, is such a name
Whose repetition will be dogged with Curses:
Whose Chronicle thus writ, The man was Noble,
But with his last Attempt, he wiped it out.
Destroyed his Country, and his name remains
To the ensuing Age, abhorred. Speak to me Son:
Thou have affected the five strains of Honor,
To imitate the graces of the Gods.
To tear with Thunder the wide Cheeks a' the Air,
And yet to change thy Sulphur with a Boult
That should but riue an Oak. Why do not speak?
Think thou it Honorable for a Nobleman
Still to remember wrongs? Daughter, speak you:
He cares not for your weeping. Speak thou Boy,
Perhaps thy childishness will move him more
Then can our Reasons. There Is no man in the world
More bound to's Mother, yet here he let us me prate
Like one in the Stocks. Thou have never in thy life,
Showed thy dear Mother any courtesy,
When she (poor Hen) fond of no second brood,
Has clock'd thee to the Wars: and safely home
Laden with Honor. Say my Request's unjust,
And spurn me back: But, if it be not so
Thou art not honest, and the Gods will plague thee
That thou restrain'st from me the Duty, which
To a Mothers part belongs. He turns away:
Down Ladies: let us shame him with him with our knees
To his sur-name Coriolanus longs more pride
Then pity to our Prayers. Down: an end,
This is the last. So, we will home to Rome,
And dye among our Neighbors: Nay, behold's,
This Boy that cannot tell what he would have,
But kneeles, and holds up hands for fellowship,
Does reason our Petition with more strength
Then thou have to deny't. Come, let us go:
This Fellow had a Volcean to his Mother:
His Wife is in Corioles, and his Child
Like him by chance: yet give us our dispatch:
I am hushed until our City be afire, and then I Will speak a little

O Mother, Mother!
What have you done? Behold, the Heavens do open,
The Gods look down, and this unnatural Scene
They laugh at. Oh my Mother, Mother: Oh!
You have won a happy Victory to Rome.
But for your Son, believe it: Oh believe it,
Most dangerously you have with him prevailed,
If not most mortal to him. But let it come:
Auffidius, though I cannot make true Wars,
I Will frame convenient peace. Now good Auffidius,
Were you in my steed, would you have heard
A Mother less? or granted less Auffidius?

I was moved withal.


I dare be sworn you were:
And sir, it is no little thing to make
Mine eyes to sweat compassion. But (good sir)
What peace you will make, advise me: For my part,
I Will not to Rome, I Will back with you, and pray you
Stand to me in this cause. Oh Mother! Wife!

I am glad thou have set thy mercy, and thy Honor
At difference in thee: Out of that I Will work
My self a former Fortune.

I by and by; But we will drink together:
And you shall bear
A better witness back then words, which we
On like conditions, will have Counter-seal'd.
Come enter with us: Ladies you deserve
To have a Temple built you: All the Swords
In Italy, and her Confederate Arms
Could not have made this peace.

See you yon'd Coin a' th Capitol, you ^ corner stone?


Why what of that?


If it be possible for you to displace it with your little finger, there is
some hope the Ladies of Rome, especially his Mother, may prevail with him. But
I say, there is no hope in it, our throats are sentenced, and stay upon
execution


Is It possible, that so short a time can alter the condition of a man.


There is differency between a Grub and a Butterfly, yet your Butterfly was a
Grub: this Martius, is grown from Man to Dragon: He has wings, he is more then
a creeping thing


He loved his Mother dearly.


So did he me: and he no more remembers his Mother now, then an eight year
old horse. The rareness of his face, sowres ripe Grapes. When he walks, he
moves like an Engine, and the ground shrinkes before his Treading. He is able
to pierce a Corflet with his eye: Talks like a knell, and his hum is a
Battery. He sits in his State, as a thing made for Alexander. What he bids be
done, is finished with his bidding. He wants nothing of a God but Eternity, and
a Heaven to Throne in


Yes, mercy, if you report him truly.


I paint him in the Character. Mark what mercy his Mother shall bring from him:
There is no more mercy in him, then there is milk in a male-Tyger, that shall
our poor City find: and all this is long of you


The Gods be good unto us.


No, in such a case the Gods will not be good unto us. When we banished him,
we respected not them: and he returning to break our necks, they respect not
us


Sir, if you would save your life, fly to your House,
The Plebeians have got your Fellow Tribune,
And hale him up and down; all swearing, if
The Roman Ladies bring not comfort home,
They Will give him death by Inches.

What Is the News?


Good News, good news, the Ladies have preuayl'd,
The Volcians are dislodged, and Martius gone:
A merrier day did never yet greet Rome,
No, not the expulsion of the Tarquins.

Friend, art thou certain this is true?
Is It most certain.

As certain as I know the Sun is fire:
Where have you lurked that you make doubt of it:
Never through an Arch so hurried the blown Tide,
As the recomforted through the gates. Why hark you:
The Trumpets, Sack-buts, Psalteries, and Fifes,
Tabors, and Symboles, and the showting Romans*
Make the Sun dance. Hark you.

This is good News:
I will go meet the Ladies. This Volumnia,
Is worth of Consuls, Senators, Patricians,
A City full: Of Tribunes such as you,
A Sea and Land full: you have prayed well to day:
This Morning, for ten thousand of your throats,
I Would not have given a doit. Hark, how they joy.

First, the Gods bless you for your tidings:
Next, accept my thankfulness.

Sir, we have all great cause to give great thanks.


They are near the City.


Almost at point to enter.


We Will meet them, and help the joy.


Behold our Patronnesse, the life of Rome:
Call all your Tribes together, praise the Gods,
And make triumphant fires, strew Flowers before them:
Vnshoot the noise that Banished Martius;
Repeal him, with the welcome of his Mother:
Cry welcome Ladies, welcome.

Welcome Ladies, welcome.


Go tell the Lords a' the City, I am here:
Deliver them this Paper: having read it,
Bid them repair to the Market place, where I
Even in theirs, and in the Commons ears
Will vouch the truth of it. Him I accuse:
The City Ports by this has entered, and
Intends to appear before the People, hoping
To purge himself with words. Dispatch.
Most Welcome.

How is it with our General?


Even so, as with a man by his own Alms impoyson'd, and with his Charity
slain


Most Noble Sir, If you do hold the same intent
Wherein you wished us parties: We Will deliver you
Of your great danger.

Sir, I cannot tell,
We must proceed as we do find the People.

The People will remain uncertain, whilst
'Twixt you there is difference: but the fall of either
Makes the Suruiuor heir of all.

I know it:
And my pretext to strike at him, admits
A good construction. I raised him, and I pawned
Mine Honor for his truth: who being so heightened,
He watered his new Plants with dewes of Flattery,
Seducing so my Friends: and to this end,
He bowed his Nature, never known before,
But to be rough, vnswayable, and free.

Sir, his stoutnesse
When he did stand for Consul, which he lost
By lack of stooping.

That I would have spoke of:
Being banished for it, he came unto my Harth,
Presented to my knife his Throat: I took him,
Made him ioynt-seruant with me: Gave him way
In all his own desires: Nay, let him choose
Out of my Files, his proiects, to accomplish
My best and freshest men, served his designements
In mine own person: help to reap the Fame
Which he did end all his; and took some pride
To do my self this wrong: Till at the last
I seemed his Follower, not Partner; and
He wadg'd me with his Countenance, as if
I had bin Mercenary.

So he did my Lord:
The Army marueyl'd at it, and in the last,
When he had carried Rome, and that we looked
For no less Spoil, then Glory.

There was it:
For which my sinews shall be stretched upon him,
At a few drops of Women's rhewme, which are
As cheap as Lies; he sold the Blood and Labor
Of our great Action; therefore shall he dye,
And I Will renew me in his fall. But hark.

Your Native Town you entered like a Post,
And had no welcomes home, but he returns
Splitting the Air with noise.

And patient Fools,
Whose children he has slain, their base throats tear
With giving him glory.

Therefore at your vantage,
Ere he express himself, or move the people
With what he would say, let him feel your Sword:
Which we will second, when he lies along
After your way. His Tale pronounced, shall bury
His Reasons, with his Body.

Say no more. Here come the Lords*


You are most welcome home.


I have not deserved it.
But worthy Lords, have you with heed perused
What I have written to you?

We have.


And grieve to heare't:
What faults he made before the last, I think
Might have sound easy Fines: But there to end
Where he was to begin, and give away
The benefit of our Leuies, answering us
With our own charge: making a Treaty, where
There was a yielding; this admits no excuse.

He approaches, you shall hear him.


Hail Lords, I am returned your Soldier:
No more infected with my Countries love
Then when I parted hence: but still subsisting
Under your great Command. You are to know,
That prosperously I have attempted, and
With bloody passage led your Wars, even to
The gates of Rome: Our spoils we have brought home
Does more then counterpoize a full third part
The charges of the Action. We have made peace
With no less Honor to the Antiates
Then shame to the Romans. And we here deliver
Subscribed by' the Consuls, and Patricians,
Together with the Seal a' th Senate, what
We have compounded on.

Read it not Noble Lords,
But tell the Traitor in the highest degree
He has abused your Powers.

Traitor? How now?


I Traitor, Martius.


Martius?


I Martius, Caius Martius: Do thou think
I Will grace thee with that Robbery, thy stolen name Coriolanus in Corioles?
You Lords and Heads a' the State, perfidiously
He has betrayed your business, and given up
For certain drops of Salt, your City Rome:
I say your City to his Wife and Mother,
Breaking his Oath and Resolution, like
A twist of rotten Silk, never admitting
Counsel a' the war: But at his Nurses tears
He whin'd and roared away your Victory,
That Pages blushed at him, and men of heart
Looked wondering each at others.

Hear'st thou Mars?


Name not the God, thou boy of Tears.


Ha?


No more.


Measurelesse Liar, thou have made my heart
Too great for what contains it. Boy? Oh Slave,
Pardon me Lords, it is the first time that ever
I was forced to scoul'd. Your judgments my grave Lords
Must give this Curre the Lie: and his own Notion,
Who wears my stripes impressed upon him, that
Must bear my beating to his Grave, shall join
To thrust the Lie unto him.

Peace ^oth, and hear me speak.


Cut me to pieces Volces men and Lads,
Stain all your edges on me. Boy, false Hound:
If you have writ your Annals true, it is there,
That like an Eagle in a Doue-coat, I
Flattered your Volcians in Corioles.
Alone I did it, Boy.

Why Noble Lords,
Will you be put in mind of his blind Fortune,
Which was your shame, by this unholy Braggart?
Before your own eyes, and ears?

Let him dye for it.


Tear him to pieces, do it presently:
He killed my Son, my daughter, he killed my Cosine
Marcus, he killed my Father.

Peace hoe: no outrage, peace:
The man is Noble, and his Fame folds in
This Orb of the earth: His last offenses to us
Shall have Judicious hearing. Stand Auffidius,
And trouble not the peace.

O that I had him, with six Auffidiusses, or more:
His Tribe, to use my lawful Sword.

Insolent Villain.


Kill, kill, kill, kill, kill him.


Hold, hold, hold, hold.


My Noble Masters, hear me speak.


O Tullus.


Thou have done a deed, whereat Valor will weep.


Tread not upon him Masters, all be quiet,
Put up your Swords.

My Lords,
When you shall know (as in this Rage
Prouok'd by him, you cannot) the great danger
Which this man's life did owe you, you will rejoice
That he is thus cut off. Please it your Honors
To call me to your Senate, I Will deliver
My self your loyal Servant, or endure
Your heauiest Censure.

Bear from hence his body,
And mourn you for him. Let him be regarded
As the most Noble Coarse, that ever Herald
Did follow to his Vrne.

His own impatience,
Takes from Auffidius a great part of blame:
Let Us make the Best of it.

My Rage is gone,
And I am struck with sorrow. Take him up:
Help three a' the cheifest Soldiers, I Will be one.
Beat thou the Drum that it speak mournfully:
Traile your steel Pikes. Though in this City he
Has widdowed and vnchilded many a one,
Which to this hour bewail the Injury,
Yet he shall have a Noble Memory. Assist.


