YOu do not meet a man but Frowns.
Our bloods no more obey the Heavens
Then our Courtiers:
Still seem, as does the Kings.

But what is the matter?


His daughter, and the heir of's kingdom (whom
He purposed to his wives sole Son, a Widow
That late be married) has referred her self
Unto a poor, but worthy Gentleman. She Is wedded,
Her Husband banished: she imprisoned, all
Is outward sorrow, though I think the King
Be touched at very heart.

None but the King?


He that has lost her too: so is the Queen,
That most desired the Match. But not a Courtier,
Although they wear their faces to the bent
Of the Kings looks, has a heart that is not
Glad at the thing they scowle at.

And why so?


He that has missed the Princess, is a thing
Too bad, for bad report: and he that has her,
(I mean, that married her, alack good man,
And therefore banished) is a Creature, such,
As to seek through the Regions of the Earth
For one, his like; there would be something failing
In him, that should compare. I do not think,
So fair an Outward, and such stuff Within
Endowes a man, but he.

You speak him far.


I do extend him (Sir) within himself,
Crush him together, rather then unfold
His measure duly.

What Is his name, and Birth?


I cannot delue him to the root: His Father
Was called Sicillius, who did join his Honor
Against the Romans, with Cassibulan,
But had his Titles by Tenantius, whom
He served with Glory, and admired Success:
So gained the Sur-addition, Leonatus.
And had (besides this Gentleman in question)
Two other Sons, who in the Wars of the time
Died with their Swords in hand. For which, their Father
Then old, and fond of issue, took such sorrow
That he quit Being; and his gentle Lady
Big of this Gentleman (our Theme) deceast
As he was borne. The King he takes the Babe
To his protection, calls him Posthumus Leonatus,
Breeds him, and makes him of his Bedchamber,
Puts to him all the Learnings that his time
Could make him the receiver of, which he took
As we do air, fast as 'twas ministered,
And in's Spring, became a Harvest: Lived in Court
(Which rare it is to do) most praised, most loved,
A sample to the youngest: to the more Mature,
A glass that feated them: and to the grauer,
A Child that guided Dotards. To his Mistress,
(For whom he now is banished) her own price
Proclaims how she esteemed him; and his Virtue
By her election may be truly read, what kind of man he is.

I honor him, even out of your report.
But pray you tell me, is she sole child to' the King?

His only child:
He had two Sons (if this be worth your hearing,
Mark it) the eldest of them, at three years old
IN the swathing clothes, the other from their Nursery
Were stolen, and to this hour, no guess in knowledge
Which way they went.

How long is this ago?


Some twenty years.


That a Kings Children should be so conuey'd,
So slackely guarded, and the search so slow
That could not trace them.

Howsoere, it is strange,
Or that the negligence may well be laughed at:
Yet is it true Sir.

I do well believe you.


We must forbear. Here comes the Gentleman,
The Queen, and Princess.

No, be assured you shall not find me (Daughter)
After the slander of most Step-Mothers,
Euill-ey'd unto you. You're my Prisoner, but
Your Jailer shall deliver you the keys
That lock up your restraint. For you Posthumus,
So soon as I can win the offended King,
I will be known your Advocate: marry yet
The fire of Rage is in him, and 'twere good
You leaned unto his Sentence, with what patience
Your wisdom may inform you.

'Please your Highness,
I will from hence to day.

You know the peril:
I Will fetch a turn about the Garden, pitying
The pangs of barred Affections, though the King
Has charged you should not speak together.

O dissembling Courtesy! How fine this Tyrant
Can tickle where she wounds? My dearest Husband,
I something fear my Fathers wrath, but nothing
(Always reserved my holy duty) what
His rage can do on me. You must be gone,
And I shall here abide the hourly shot
Of angry eyes: not comforted to live,
But that there is this Jewel in the world,
That I may see again.

My Queen, my Mistress:
O Lady, weep no more, least I give cause
To be suspected of more tenderness
Then does become a man. I will remain
The loyall'st husband, that did ere plight troth.
My residence in Rome, at one Filorio's,
Who, to my Father was a Friend, to me
Known but by Letter; thither write (my Queen)
And with mine eyes, I Will drink the words you send,
Though Ink be made of Gall.

Be brief, I pray you:
If the King come, I shall incur, I know not
How much of his displeasure: yet I Will move him
To walk this way: I never do him wrong,
But he does buy my Injuries, to be Friends:
Pays dear for my offenses.

Should we be taking leave
As long a term as yet we have to live,
The loathnesse to depart, would grow: Adieu.

Nay, stay a little:
Were you but riding forth to air your self,
Such parting were too petty. Look here (Love)
This Diamond was my Mothers; take it (Heart)
But keep it till you woo another Wife,
When Imogen is dead.

How, how? Another?
You gentle Gods, give me but this I have,
And sear up my embracements from a next,
With bonds of death. Remain, remain thou here,
While sense can keep it on: And sweetest, fairest,
As I (my poor self) did exchange for you
To your so infinite loss; so in our trifles
I still win of you. For my sake wear this,
It is a Manacle of Love, I Will place it
Upon this fairest Prisoner.

O the Gods!
When shall we see again?

Alack, the King.


Thou basest thing, avoid hence, from my sight:
If after this command thou fraught the Court
With thy unworthiness, thou dyest. Away,
You Are poison to my blood.

The Gods protect you,
And bless the good Remainders of the Court:
I am gone.

There cannot be a pinch in death
More sharp then this is.

O disloyal thing,
That should repair my youth, thou heap'st
A years age on me^

I beseech you Sir,
Harm not your self with your vexation,
I am senseless of your Wrath; a Touch more rare
Subdues all pangs, all fears.

Past Grace? Obedience?


Past hope, and in despair, that way past Grace.


That might have had
The sole Son of my Queen.

O blessed, that I might not: I chose an Eagle,
And did avoid a Puttocke.

Thou took'st a Beggar, would have made my
Throne, a Seat for baseness.

No, I rather added a luster to it.


O thou vilde one!


Sir,
It is your fault that I have loved Posthumus:
You bred him as my Play-fellow, and he is
A man, worth any woman: Ouer-buyes me
Almost the sum he pays.

What? art thou mad?

Almost Sir: Heaven restore me: would I were
A Neat-heards Daughter, and my Leonatus
Our Neighbour-Shepheards Son.

Thou foolish thing;
They were again together: you have done
Not after our command. Away with her,
And pen her up.

Beseech your patience: Peace
Dear Lady daughter, peace. Sweet Sovereign,
Leave us to our selves, and make your self some comfort
Out of your best advice.

Nay let her languish
A drop of blood a day, and being aged
Dye of this Folly.

Fie, you must give way:
Here is your Servant. How now Sir? What news?

My Lord your Son, drew on my Master.


Hah?
No harm I trust is done?

There might have been,
But that my Master rather played, then fought,
And had no help of Anger: they were parted
By Gentlemen, at hand.

I am very glad on it.


Your Son's my Fathers friend, he takes his part
To draw upon an Exile. O brave Sir,
I would they were in Affricke both together,
My self by with a Needle, that I might prick
The goer back. Why came you from your Master?

On his command: he would not suffer me
To bring him to the Haven: left these Notes
Of what commands I should be subject too,
When It pleased you to employ me.

This has been
Your faithful Servant: I dare lay mine Honor
He will remain so.

I humbly thank your Highness.


Pray walk awhile.


About some half hour hence,
Pray you speak with me;
You shall (at least) go see my Lord aboard.
For this time leave me.

Sir, I would advise you to shift a Shirt; the Violence of Action has made you
reek as a Sacrifice: where air comes out, air comes in: There Is none abroad
so wholesome as that you vent


If my Shirt were bloody, then to shift it.
Have I hurt him?

No faith: not so much as his patience.


Hurt him: His body's a passable Carcass if he be not hurt. It is a
through-fare for Steel if it be not hurt


His Steel was in debt, it went of the Backe-side the Town.


The Villain would not stand me.


No, but he fled forward still, toward your face.


Stand you? you have Land enough of your own:
But he added to your having, gave you some ground.

As many Inches, as you have Oceans (Puppies.)


I would they had not come between us.


So would I, till you had measured how long a Fool you were upon the ground.


And that she should love this Fellow, and refuse me.


If it be a sin to make a true election, she is damned.


Sir, as I told you always: her Beauty and her Brain go not together. She Is
a good sign, but I have seen small reflection of her wit


She shines not upon Fools, least the reflection
Should hurt her.

Come, I Will to my Chamber: would there had been some hurt done.


I wish not so, unless it had bin the fall of an Ass, which is no great hurt.


You Will go with us?


I Will attend your Lordship.


Nay come, let us go together.


Well my Lord.


I would thou grew'st unto the shores of the Haven,
And questioned'st every Sail: if he should write,
And I not have it, 'twere a Paper lost
As offered mercy i^: What was the last
That he spoke to thee?

It was his Queen, his Queen.


Then wau'd his Handkerchiefe?


And kissed it, Madam.


Senseless Linen, happier therein then (...)
And that was all?

No Madam: for so long
As he could make me with his eye, or ear,
Distinguish him from others, he did keep
The Deck, with Glove, or Hat, or Handkerchife,
Still wauing, as the fits and stirs of's mind
Could best express how slow his Soul sailed on,
How swift his Ship.

Thou should have made him
As little as a Crow, or less, ere left
To after-eye him.

Madam, so I did.


I would have broke mine eye-strings;
Cracked them, but to look upon him, till the diminution
Of space, had pointed him sharp as my Needle:
Nay, followed him, till he had melted from
The smalnesse of a Gnat, to air: and then
Have turned mine eye, and wept. But good Pisanio,
When shall we hear from him.

Be assured Madam,
With his next vantage.

I did not take my leave of him, but had
Most pretty things to say: Ere I could tell him
How I would think on him at certain hours,
Such thoughts, and such: Or I could make him swear,
The She Is of Italy should not betray
Mine Interest, and his Honor: or have charged him
At the sixth hour of Morn, at Noone, at Midnight,
TO encounter me with Orisons, for then
I am in Heaven for him: Or ere I could,
Give him that parting kiss, which I had set
Betwixt two charming word^, comes in my Father,
And like the Tyrannous breathing of the North,
Shakes all our buddes from growing.

The Queen (Madam)
Desires your Highness Company.

Those things I bid you do, get them dispatched,
I will attend the Queen.

Madam, I shall.


Believe it Sir, I have seen him in Britain; he was then of a Cressent note,
expected to prove so worthy, as since he has been allowed the name of. But I
could then have looked on him, without the help of Admiration, though the
Catalogue of his endowments had bin rabled by his side, and I to peruse him by
Items


You speak of him when he was less furnished, then now he is, with that
which makes him both without, and within


I have seen him in France: we had very many there, could behold the Sun,
with as firm eyes as he


This matter of marrying his Kings Daughter, wherein he must be weighed rather
by her value, then his own, words him (I doubt not) a great deal from the
matter


And then his banishment.


I, and the approbation of those that weep this lamentable divorce under her
colors, are wonderfully to extend him, be it but to fortify her judgment,
which else an easy battery might lay flat, for taking a Beggar without less
quality. But how comes it, he is to soiourne with you? How creepes acquaintance


His Father and I were Soldiers together, to whom I have bin often bound for
no less then my life

Here comes the Britain. Let him be so entertained among'st you, as suites
with Gentleman of your knowing, to a Stranger of his quality. I beseech you all
be better known to this Gentleman, whom I commend to you, as a Noble Friend of
mine. How Worthy he is, I will leave to appear hereafter, rather then story
him in his own hearing


Sir, we have known together in Orleance.


Since when, I have bin debtor to you for courtesies, which I will be ever to
pay, and yet pay still


Sir, you o're-rate my poor kindness, I was glad I did atone my Countryman
and you: it had been pity you should have been put together, with so mortal
a purpose, as then each bore, upon importance of so slight and triuiall a
nature


By your pardon Sir, I was then a young Traveler, rather shunned to go even
with what I heard, then in my every action to be guided by others experiences:
but upon my mended judgment (if I offend to say it is mended) my Quarrel was
not altogether slight


Faith yes, to be put to the arbiterment of Swords, and by such two, that would
by all likelihood have confounded one the other, or have fallen both


Can we with manners, ask what was the difference?


Safely, I think, 'twas a contention in public, which may (without
contradiction) suffer the report. It was much like an argument that fell out
last night, where each of us fell in praise of our Country-Mistresses. This
Gentleman, at that time vouching (and upon warrant of bloody affirmation) his
to be more Fair, Virtuous, Wise, Chaste, Constant, Qualified, and less
attemptible then any, the rarest of our Ladies in France


That Lady is not now living; or this Gentleman's opinion by this, worn out.


She holds her Virtue still, and I my mind.


You must not so far prefer her, before ours of Italy.


Being so far prouok'd as I was in France: I would abate her nothing, though
I profess my self her Adorer, not her Friend


As fair, and as good: a kind of hand in hand comparison, had been something
too fair, and too good for any Lady in Britanie; if she went before others. I
have seen as that Diamond of yours out-lusters many I have beheld, I could not
believe she excelled many: but I have not seen the most precious Diamond that
is, nor you the Lady


I praised her, as I rated her: so do I my Stone.


What do you esteem it at?


More then the world enioyes.


Either your vnparagon'd Mistirs is dead, or she is out-priz'd by a trifle.


You are mistaken: the one may be sold or given, or if there were wealth
enough for the purchases, or merit for the gift. The other is not a thing for
sale, and only the gift of the Gods


Which the Gods have given you?


Which by their Graces I will keep.


You may wear her in title yours: but you know strange Foul light upon
neighboring Ponds. Your Ring may be stolen too, so your brace of vnprizeable
Estimations, the one is but frail, and the other Casual;. A cunning Thief,
or a (that way) accomplished Courtier, would hazard the winning both of first
and last


Your Italy, contains none so accomplished a Courtier to convince the Honor
of my Mistress: if in the holding or loss of that, you term her frail, I do
nothing doubt you have store of Thieves, notwithstanding I fear not my Ring


Let us leave here, Gentlemen?


Sir, with all my heart. This worthy Signior I thank him, makes no stranger of
me, we are familiar at first


With five times so much conversation, I should get ground of your fair
Mistress; make her go back, even to the yiedling, had I admittance, and
opportunity to friend


No, no.


I dare thereupon pawn the moytie of my Estate, to your Ring, which in my
opinion o're-values it something: but I make my wager rather against your
Confidence, then her Reputation. And to bar your offense herein to, I durst
attempt it against any Lady in the world


You are a great deal abused in too bold a persuasion, and I doubt not you
sustain what y' are worthy of, by your Attempt


What Is that?


A Repulse though your Attempt (as you call it) deserve more; a punishment too.


Gentlemen enough of this, it came in too suddenly, let it dye as it was
borne, and I pray you be better acquainted


Would I had put my Estate, and my Neighbors on the approbation of what I have
spoke


What Lady would you choose to assail?


Yours, whom in constancy you think stands so safe. I will lay you ten
thousands Ducats to your Ring, that commend me to the Court where your Lady
is, with no more advantage then the opportunity of a second conference, and I
will bring from thence, that Honor of hers, which you imagine so reserved


I will wage against your Gold, Gold to it: My Ring I hold dear as my finger,
it is part of it


You are a Friend, and there in the wiser: if you buy Ladies flesh at a Million
a Dram, you cannot preseure it from tainting; but I see you have some Religion
in you, that you fear


This is but a custom in your tongue: you bear a grauer purpose I hope.


I am the Master of my speeches, and would vnder-go what is spoken, I swear.


Will you? I shall but lend my Diamond till your return: let there be
Covenants drawn between's. My Mistress exceedes in goodness, the hugeness of
your unworthy thinking* I dare you to this match: here is my Ring


I will have it no lay.


By the Gods it is one: if I bring you no sufficient testimony that I have
enjoyed the dearest bodily part of your Mistress: my ten thousand Ducats are
yours, so is your Diamond too: if I come off, and leave her in such honor as
you have trust in; She your Jewel, this your Jewel, and my Gold are yours:
provided. I have your commendation, for my more free entertainment


I embrace these Conditions, let us have Articles betwixt us: only thus far
you shall answer, if you make your voyage upon her, and give me directly to
understand, you have preuayl'd, I am no further your Enemy, she is not worth
our debate. If she remain vnseduc'd, you not making it appear otherwise: for
your ill opinion, and the assault you have made to her chastity, you shall
answer me with your Sword


Your hand, a Covenant: we will have these things set down be lawful
Counsel, and straight away for Britain, least the Bargain should catch
cold, and sterue: I will fetch my Gold, and have our two Wagers recorded


Agreed.


Will this hold, think you.


Signior Iachimo will not from it.
Pray let us follow 'em.

Whiles yet the dewe's on ground,
Gather those Flowers,
Make haste. Who has the note of them?

I Madam.


Dispatch.
Now Master Doctor, have you brought those drugges?

Pleases your Highness, I: here they are, Madam:
But I beseech your Grace, without offense
(My Conscience bids me ask) wherefore you have
Commanded of me these most poisonous Compounds,
Which are the moouers of a languishing death:
But though slow, deadly.

I wonder, Doctor,
Thou ask'st me such a Question: Have I not been
Thy Pupil long? Have thou not learned me how
To make Perfumes? Distill? Preserve? Yea so,
That our great King himself does woo me often
For my Confections? Having thus far proceeded,
(Unless thou think me devilish) is it not meet
That I did amplify my judgment in
Other Conclusions? I will try the forces
Of these thy Compounds, on such Creatures as
We count not worth the hanging (but none humane)
To try the vigor of them, and apply
Allayments to their Act, and by them gather
Their several virtues, and effects.

Your Highness
Shall from this practice, but make hard your heart:
Besides, the seeing these effects will be
Both noisome, and infectious.

O content thee*
Here comes a flattering Rascal, upon him
Will I first work: He Is for his Master,
And enemy to my Son. How now Pisanio?
Doctor, your service for this time is ended,
Take your own way.

I do suspect you, Madam,
But you shall do no harm.

Hark thee, a word.


I do not like her. She does think she has
Strange lingering poisons: I do know her spirit,
And will not trust one of her malice* with
A drugge of such damned Nature. Those she has,
Will stupifie and dull the Sense awhile,
Which first (perchance) she will prove on Cats and Dogs,
Then afterward up higher: but there is
No danger in what show of death it makes,
More then the locking up the Spirits a time,
To be more fresh, reviving. She is fooled
With a most false effect: and I, the truer,
So to be false with her.

No further service, Doctor,
Until I send for thee.

I humbly take my leave.


Weeps she still (say thou?)
Do thou think in time
She will not quench, and let instructions enter
Where Folly now possesses? Do thou work:
When thou shall bring me word she loves my Son,
I Will tell thee on the instant, thou art then
As great as is thy Master: Greater, for
His Fortunes all lie speechless, and his name
Is at last gasp. Return he cannot, nor
Continue where he is: To shift his being,
Is to exchange one misery with another,
And every day that comes, comes to decay
A days work in him. What shall thou expect
To be depender on a thing that leanes?
Who cannot be new built, nor has no Friends
So much, as but to prop him? Thou take up
Thou know not what: But take it for thy labor,
It is a thing I made, which has the King
Five times redeemed from death. I do not know
What is more Cordial. Nay, I prithee take it,
It is an earnest of a farther good
That I mean to thee. Tell thy Mistress how
The case stands with her: do it, as from thy self;
Think what a chance thou changest on, but think
Thou have thy Mistress still, to boot, my Son,
Who shall take notice of thee. I Will move the King
To any shape of thy Preferment, such
As thou wilt desire: and then my self, I cheefely,
That set thee on to this desert, am bound
To load thy merit richly. Call my women.
Think on my words. A slye, and constant knave,
Not to be shak'd: the Agent for his Master,
And the Remembrancer of her, to hold
The hand-fast to her Lord. I have given him that,
Which if he take, shall quite unpeople her
Of Leidgers for her Sweet: and which, she after
Except she bend her humor, shall be assured
To taste of too.
So, so: Well done, well done:
The Violets, Cowslippes, and the Prime-Roses
Bear to my Closset: Fare thee well, Pisanio.
Think on my words.

And shall do:
But when to my good Lord, I prove untrue,
I Will choke my self: there is all I Will do for you.

A Father cruel, and a Stepdame false,
A Foolish Suitor to a Wedded-Lady,
That has her Husband banished: O, that Husband,
My supreme Crown of grief, and those repeated
Vexations of it. Had I bin Theefe-stolne,
As my two Brothers, happy: but most miserable
Is the desires that is glorious. Blessed be those
How mean so ere, that have their honest wills,
Which seasons comfort. Who may this be? Fie.

Madam, a Noble Gentleman of Rome,
Comes from my Lord with Letters.

Change you, Madam:
The Worthy Leonatus is in safety,
And greetes your Highness dearly.

Thanks good Sir,
You're kindly welcome.

All of her, that is out of door, most rich:
If she be furnished with a mind so rare
She is alone the Arabian-Bird; and I
Have lost the wager. Boldness be my Friend:
Arm me Audacitie from head to foot,
Orlike the Parthian I shall flying fight,
Rather directly fly.
He is one of the Noblest note, to whose kindnesses I am most infinitely tied.
Reflect upon him accordingly, as you value your trust.

Leonatus.



So far I read aloud.
But even the very middle of my heart
Is warmed by' the rest, and take it thankefully.
You are as welcome (worthy Sir) as I
Have words to bid you, and shall find it so
In all that I can do.

Thanks fairest Lady:
What are men mad? Has Nature given them eyes
To see this vaulted Arch, and the rich Crop
Of Sea and Land, which can distinguish 'twixt
The fiery Orbs above, and the twinn'd Stones
Upon the numbered Beach, and can we not
Partition make with Spectales so precious
Twixt fair, and foul?

What makes your admiration?


It cannot be in the eye: for Apes, and Monkeys
'Twixt two such She Is, would chatter this way, and
Contemn with mowes the other. Nor in the judgment:
For Idiots in this case of favor, would
Be wisely definit: Nor in the Appetite.
Sluttery to such near Excellence, opposed
Should make desire vomit emptiness,
Not so allur^d to feed.

What is the matter trow?


The Cloyed will:
That satiate yet vnsatisfi'd desire, that Tub
Both filled and running: Ravening first the Lamb,
Longs after for the Garbage.

What, dear Sir,
Thus rap's you? Are you well?

Thanks Madam well: Beseech you Sir,
Desire my Man's abode, where I did leave him:
He Is strange and peevish.

I was going Sir,
To give him welcome.

Continues well my Lord?
His health beseech you?

Well, Madam.


Is he disposed to mirth? I hope he is.


Exceeding pleasant: none a stranger there,
So merry, and so gamesome: he is called
The Britain Reueller.

When he was here
He did incline to sadness, and often times
Not knowing why.

I never saw him sad.
There is a Frenchman his Companion, one
An eminent Monsieur, that it seems much loves
A Gallian-Girle at home. He furnaces
The thick sighs from him; whiles the jolly Britain,
(Your Lord I mean) laughes from's free lungs: cries oh,
Can my sides hold, to think that man who knows
By History, Report, or his own proof
What woman is, yea what she cannot choose
But must be: will's free hours languish:
For assured bon^age?

Will my Lord say so?


I Madam, with his eyes in flood with laughter,
It is a Recreation to be by
And hear him mock the Frenchman:
But Heauen's know some men are much too blame.

Not he I hope.


Not he:
But yet Heauen's bounty toward him, might
Be used more thankfully. In himself it is much;
In you which I account his beyond all Talents.
Whilst I am bound to wonder, I am bound
To pity too.

What do you pity Sir?


Two Creatures heartyly.


Am I one Sir?
You look on me: what wrack discern you in me
Deserves your pity?

Lamentable: what
To hide me from the radiant Sun, and solace
IN the Dungeon by a Snuff.

I pray you Sir,
Deliver with more opennesse your answers
To my demands. Why do you pity me?

That others do,
(I was about to say) enjoy your -- but
It is an office of the Gods to venge it,
Not mine to speak on it.

You do seem to know
Something of me, or what concerns me; pray you
Since doubting things go ill, often hurts more
Then to be sure they do. For Certainties
Either are past remedies; or timely knowing,
The remedy then borne. Discover to me
What both you spur and stop.

Had I this cheek
To bathe my lips upon: this hand, whose touch,
(Whose every touch) would force the Feelers soul
To' the oath of loyalty. This ob^ect, which
Takes prisoner the wild motion of mine eye,
Fiering it only here, should I (damned then)
Slauuer with lips as common as the stayres
That mount the Capitol: Join gripes, with hands
Made hard with hourly falsehood (falsehood as
With labor:) then by peeping in an eye
Base and illustrious as the smoakie light
That Is fed with stinking Tallow: it were fit
That all the plagues of Hell should at one time
Encounter such revolt.

My Lord, I fear
Has forgot Britain.

And himself, not I
Inclined to this intelligence, pronounce
The Beggary of his change: but it is your Graces
That from my mutest Conscience, to my tongue,
Charms this report out.

Let me hear no more.


O dearest Soul: your Cause does strike my heart
With pity, that does make me sick. A Lady
So fair, and fastened to an Emperie
Would make the great'st King double, to be partner'd
With Tomboyes hyr'd, with that self exhibition
Which your own Coffers yield: with diseased ventures
That play with all Infirmities for Gold,
Which rottenness can lend Nature. Such boiled stuff
As well might poison Poison. Be revenged,
Or she that bore you, was no Queen, and you
Recoyle from your great Stock.

Revenged:
How should I be revenged? If this be true,
(As I have such a Heart, that both mine ears
Must not in haste abuse) if it be true,
How should I be revenged?

Should he make me
Live like Diana's Priest, betwixt cold sheets,
Whiles he is vaulting variable Rampes
In your despite, upon your purse: revenge it.
I dedicate my self to your sweet pleasure,
More Noble then that runnagate to your bed,
And will continue fast to your Affection,
Still close, as sure.

What hoa, Pisanio?


Let me my service tender on your lips.


Away, I do condemn mine ears, that have
So long attended thee. If thou were Honorable
Thou would have told this tale for Virtue, not
For such an end thou seek'st, as base, as strange:
Thou wrong'st a Gentleman, who is as far
From thy report, as thou from Honor: and
Solicites here a Lady, that disdaines
Thee, and the Devil alike. What hoa, Pisanio?
The King my Father shall be made acquainted
Of thy Assault: if he shall think it fit,
A saucy Stranger in his Court, to Mart
As in a Romish Stew, and to expound
His beastly mind to us; he has a Court
He little cares for, and a Daughter, who
He not respects at all. What hoa, Pisanio?

O happy Leonatus I may say*
The credit that thy Lady has of thee
Deserves thy trust, and thy most perfect goodness
Her assured credit. Blessed live you long,
A Lady to the worthiest Sir, that ever
Country called his; and you his Mistress, only
For the most worthiest fit. Give me your pardon,
I have spoke this to know if your Affiance
Were deeply rooted, and shall make your Lord,
That which he is, new over: And he is one
The truest manner'd: such a holy Witch,
That he enchants Societies into him:
Half all men hearts are his.

You make amends.


He sits amongst men, like a defended God;
He has a kind of Honor sets him off,
More then a mortal seeming. Be not angry
(Most mighty Princess) that I have aduentur'd
To try your taking of a false report, which has
Honored with confirmation your great Judgment,
In the election of a Sir, so rare,
Which you know, cannot err. The love I bear him,
Made me to fan you thus, but the Gods made you
(Unlike all others) chaffelesse. Pray your pardon.

All Is well Sir:
Take my power in the Court for yours.

My humble thanks: I had almost forgot
TO entreat your Grace, but in a small request,
And yet of moment too, for it concerns:
Your Lord, my self, and other Noble Friends
Are partners in the business.

Pray what is it?


Some dozen Romans of us, and your Lord
(The best Feather of our wing) have mingled sums
To buy a Present for the Emperor*
Which I (the Factor for the rest) have done
In France: it is Plate of rare device, and Jewels
Of rich, and exquisite form, their valewes great,
And I am something curious, being strange
To have them in safe stowage: May it please you
To take them in protection.

Willingly:
And pawn mine Honor for their safety, since
My Lord has interest in them, I will keep them
In my Bedchamber.

They are in a Trunk
Attended by my men: I will make bold
To send them to you, only for this night:
I must aboard to morrow.

O no, no.


Yes I beseech: or I shall short my word
By lengthening my return. From Gallia,
I crossed the Seas on purpose, and on promise
To see your Grace.

I thank you for your pains:
But not away to morrow.

O I must Madam.
Therefore I shall beseech you, if you please
To greet your Lord with writing, do it to night,
I have out-stood my time, which is material
To' the tender of our Present.

I will write:
Send your Trunk to me, it shall safe be kept,
And truly yielded you: you're very welcome.

Was there ever man had such Iucke? when I kissed the Jack upon an vp-cast, to
be hit away? I had a hundred pound on it: and then a whor^on Iacke-an-Apes, mu^t
take me up for swearing, as if I borrowed mine oa^ne^ of him, and might not
spend them at my pleasure


What got he by that? you have broke his pate with your Bowl.


If his wit had bin like him that broke it: it would have run all out.


When a Gentleman is disposed to swear: it is not for any standers by to
curtall his oaths. Ha


No my Lord; nor crop the ears of them.


Whoreson dog: I gave him satisfaction? would he had bin one of my Rank.


To have smelled like a Fool.


I am not vexed more at any thing in the earth: a pox on it. I had rather not be
so Noble as I am: they dare not fight with me, because of the Queen my Mother:
every Iacke-Slaue has his belly full of Fighting, and I must go up and down
like a Cock, that no body can match


You are Cock and Capon too, and you crow
Cock, with your comb on.

Say thou?


It is not fit you Lordship should undertake every
Companion, that you give offense too.

No, I know that: but it is fit I should commit offense to my inferiors.


I, it is fit for your Lordship only.


Why so I say.


Did you here of a Stranger that is come to Court night?


A Stranger, and I not know on it?


He Is a strange Fellow himself, and knows it not.


There Is an Italian come, and it is thought one of Leonatus Friends.


Leonatus? A banished Rascal; and he is another, whatsoever he be. Who told you
of this Stranger


One of your Lordships Pages.


Is it fit I went to look upon him? Is there no de^ogation in it?


You cannot derogate my Lord.


Not easily I think.


You are a Fool granted, therefore your Issues being foolish do not derogate.


Come, I Will go see this Italian: what I have lost to day at Bowls, I Will win to
night of him. Come: go


I Will attend your Lordship.
That such a crafty Devil as is his Mother
Should yield the world this Ass: A woman, that
Bears all down with her Brain, and this her Son,
Cannot take two from twenty for his heart,
And leave eighteen. Alas poor Princess,
Thou divine Imogen, what thou endur'st,
Betwixt a Father by thy Step-dame governed,
A Mother hourly coining plots: A Wooer,
More hateful then the foul expusion is
Of thy dear Husband. Then that horrid Act
Of the divorce, heel'd make the Heavens hold firm
The walls of thy dear Honor. Keep vnshak'd
That Temple thy fair mind, that thou may stand
TO enjoy thy banished Lord: and this great Land.

Who Is there? My woman: Helene?


Please you Madam.


What houe is it?


Almost midnight, Madam.


I have read three hours then:
Mine eyes are weak,
Fold down the leaf where I have left: to bed.
Take not away the Taper, leave it burning:
And if thou can awake by four of the clock,
I prithee call me: Sleep has ceiz'd me wholly.
To your protection I commend me, Gods,
From Fay^ies, and the Tempters of the night,
Guard me beseech ye.

The Crickets sing, and man's ore-labor'd sense
Repaires it self by rest: Our Tarquine thus
Did softly press the Rushes, ere he wakened
The Chastity he wounded. Cytherea,
How bravely thou becom'st thy Bed; fresh Lilly,
And whiter then the Sheets: that I might touch,
But kiss, one kiss. Rubies vnparagon'd,
How dearly they do it: It Is her breathing that
Perfumes the Chamber thus: the Flame of the Taper
Bows toward her, and would vnder-peepe her lids.
To see the enclosed Lights, now Canopied
Under these windows, White and Azure laced
With Blew of Heavens own tinct. But my design?
To note the Chamber, I will write all down,
Such, and such pictures: There the window, such
The adronement of her Bed; the Arras, Figures,
Why such, and such: and the Contents of the Story.
Ah, but some natural notes about her Body,
Above ten thousand meaner Moueables
Would testify, to enrich mine Inventory.
O sleep, thou Ape of death, lie dull upon her,
And be her Sense but as a Monument,
Thus in a Chapel lying. Come off, come off;
As slippery as the Gordian-knot was hard.
It Is mine, and this will witness outwardly,
As strongly as the Conscience does within:
To' the madding of her Lord. On her left breast
Amole Cinque-spotted: Like the Crimson drops
IN the bottom of a Cowslippe. Here Is a Voucher,
Stronger then ever Law could make; this Secret
Will force him think I have picked the lock, and t'ane
The treasure of her Honor. No more: to what end?
Why should I write this down, that is riuete,
Screwed to my memory. She has bin reading late,
The Tale of Tereus, here the leaffe's turned down
Where Philomele gave up. I have enough,
To' the Truncke again, and shut the spring of it.
Swift, swift, you Dragons of the night, that dawning
May bear the Ravens eye: I lodge in fear,
Though this a heavenly Angel: hell is here.
One, two, three: time, time.

Your Lordship is the most patient man in loss, the most coldest that ever
turned up Ace


It would make any man cold to loose.


But not every man patient after the noble temper of your Lordship; You are
most hot, and furious when you win


Winning will put any man into courage: if I could get this foolish Imogen, I
should have Gold enough: it is almost morning, is it not


Day, my Lord.


I would this Music would come: I am advised to give her Music a mornings,
they say it will penetrate

Come on, tune: If you can penetrate her with your fingering, so: we will try
with tongue too: if none will do, let her remain: but I Will never give over.
First, a very excellent good conceyted things after a wonderful sweet air,
with admirable rich words to it, and then let her consider


Hark, hark, the Lark at Heavens gate sings, and Phoebus gins arise,
His Steeds to water at those Springs on chalic'd Flowers that lies:
And winking Mary-buds begin to open their Golden eyes
With every thing that pretty is, my Lady sweet arise:
Arise, arise.

So, get you gone: if this pen^trate, I will consider your Music the better:
if it do not, it is a voice in her ears which Horse-haires, and Calues-guts,
nor the voice of vnpaued Eunuch to boot, can never amed


Here comes the King.


I am glad I was up so late, for that is the reason I was up so early: he
cannot choose but take this Service I have done, fatherly. Good morrow to your
Majesty, and to my gracious Mother


Attend you here the door of our stern daughter
Will she not forth?

I have assayl'd her with Musickes, but she vouchsafes no notice.


The Exile of her Minion is too new,
She has not yet forgot him, some more time
Must wear the print of his remembrance on it,
And then she is yours.

You are most bound to' the King,
Who let us go by no vantages, that may
Prefer you to his daughter: Frame your self
To orderly solicity, and be friended
With aptness of the season: make denials
Increase your Services: so seem, as if
You were inspired to do those duties which
You tender to her: that you in all obey her,
Save when command to your dismission tends,
And therein you are senseless.

Senseless? Not so.


So like you (Sir) Ambassadors from Rome;
The one is Caius Lucius.

A worthy Fellow,
Albeit he comes on angry purpose now;
But that is no fault of his: we must receive him
According to the Honor of his Sender,
And toward himself, his goodness fore-spent on us
We must extend our notice: Our dear Son,
When you have given good morning to your Mistress,
Attend the Queen, and us, we shall have need
TO employ you toward this Roman.
Come our Queen.

If she be up, I Will speak with her: if not
Let her lie still, and dream: by your leave hoa,
I know her women are about her: what
If I do line one of their hand^, it is Gold
Which buys admittance (often it does) yea, and makes
Diana's Rangers false themselves, yield up
Their Dear to' the stand of the Stealer: and it is Gold
Which makes the True-man killed, and saues the Thief:
Nay, sometime hangs both Thief, and True-man: what
Can it not do, and undo? I will make
One of her women Lawyer to me, for
I yet not understand the case my self.
By your leave.

Who Is there that knockes?


A Gentleman.


No more.


Yes, and a Gentlewomans Son.


That Is more
Then some whose Tailors are as dear as yours,
Can justly boast of: what is your Lordships pleasure?

Your Ladies person, is she ready?


I, to keep her Chamber.


There is Gold for you,
Sell me your good report.

How my good name? or to report of you
What I shall think is good. The Princess.

Good morrow fairest, Sister your sweet hand.


Good morrow Sir, you lay out too much pains
For purchasing but trouble: the thanks I give,
Is telling you that I am poor of thanks,
And scarce can spare them.

Still I swear ^ love you.


If you but said so, 'twere as deep with me:
If you swear still, your recompense is still
That I regard it not.

This is no answer.


But that you shall not say, I yield being silent,
I would not speak. I pray you spare me, 'faith
I shall unfold equal discourtesie
To your best kindness: one of your great knowing
Should learn (being taught) forbearance.

To leave you in your madness, 'twere my sin,
I will not.

Fools are not mad Folks.


Do you call me Fool?


As I am mad I do:
If you will be patient, I Will no more be mad,
That cures us both. I am much sorry (Sir)
You put me to forget a Ladies manners
By being so verbal: and learn now, for all,
That I which know my heart, do here pronounce
By the very truth of it, I care not for you,
And am so near the lack of Charity
To accuse my self, I hate you: which I had rather
You felt, then make it my boast.

You sin against
Obedience, which you owe your Father, for
The Contract you pretend with that base Wretch,
One, bred of Alms, and fostered with cold dishes,
With scraps of the Court: It is no Contract, none;
And though it be allowed in meaner parties
(Yet who then he more mean) to knit their souls
(On whom there is no more dependancie
But Brats and Beggary) in selfe-figur'd knot,
Yet you are curbed from that enlargement, by
The consequence of the Crown, and must not foil
The precious note of it; with a base Slave,
A Hilding for a Liuorie, a Squires Cloth,
A Pantler; not so eminent.

Profane Fellow:
Were thou the Son of Jupiter, and no more,
But what thou art besides: thou were too base,
To be his Groom: thou were dignified enough
Even to the point of Envy. If 'twere made
Comparatiue for your Virtues, to be styled
The under Hangman of his Kingdom; and hated
For being preferred so well.

The South-Fog rot him.


He never can meet more mischance, then come
To be but named of thee. His mean Garment
That ever has but clipped his body; is dearer
In my respect, then all the Heirs above thee,
Were they all made such men: How now Pisanio?

His Garments? Now the devil.


To Dorothy my woman hie thee presently.


His Garment?


I am sprighted with a Fool,
Frighted, and angered worse: Go bid my woman
Search for a Jewel, that too casually
Has left mine Arm: it was thy Masters. Shrew me
If I would loose it for a Reuenew,
Of any Kings in Europe. I do think,
I saw't this morning: Confident I am.
Last night 'twas on mine Arm; I kissed it,
I hope it be not gone, to tell my Lord
That I kiss aught but he.

'Twill not be lost.


I hope so: go and search.


You have abused me:
His meanest Garment?

I, I said so Sir,
If you will make it an Action, call witness to it.

I will inform your Father.


Your Mother too:
She Is my good Lady; and will concieue, I hope
But the worst of me. So I leave your Sir,
To' the worst of discontent.

I Will bereueng'd:
His mean Garment? Well.

Fear it not Sir: I would I were so sure
To win the King, as I am bold, her Honor
Will remain here is.

What means do you make to him?


Not any: but abide the change of Time,
Quake in the present winters state, and wish
That warmer days would come: In these feared hope
I barely gratify your love; they failing
I must die much your debtor.

Your very goodness, and your company,
Ore-payes all I can do. By this your King,
Has heard of Great Augustus: Caius Lucius,
Will does Commission thoroughly. And I think
He Will grant the Tribute: send the Arrerages,
Or look upon our Romans, whose remembrance
Is yet fresh in their grief.

I do believe
(Statist though I am none, nor like to be)
That this will prove a War; and you shall hear
The Legion now in Gallia, sooner landed
In our not-fearing-Britaine, then have tidings
Of any penny Tribute paid. Our Countrymen
Are men more ordered, then when Julius Caesar
Smiled at their lack of skill, but found their courage
Worthy his frowning at. Their discipline,
(Now wing-led with their courages) will make known
To their Approuers, they are People, such
That mend upon the world.

See Iachimo.


The swiftest Hearts, have posted you by land;
And Winds of all the Corners kissed your Sails,
To make your vessel nimble.

Welcome Sir.


I hope the briefness of your answer, made
The speediness of your return.

Your Lady,
Is one of the fairest that I have looked upon

And therewithal the best, or let her beauty
Look thorough a Casement to allure false hearts,
And be false with them.

Here are Letters for you.


Their tenure good I trust.


It Is very like.


Was Caius Lucius in the Britain Court,
When you were there?

He was expected then,
But not approached.

All is well yet,
Sparkles this Stone as it was wont, or is it not
Too dull for your good wearing?

If I have lost it,
I should have lost the worth of it in Gold,
I Will make a journey twice as far, t'enioy
A second night of such sweet shortness, which
Was mine in Britain, for the Ring is won.

The Stones too hard to come by.


Not a whit,
Your Lady being so easy.

Make note Sir
Your loss, your Sport: I hope you know that we
Must not continue Friends.

Good Sir, we must
If you keep Covenant: had I not brought
The knowledge of your Mistress home, I grant
We were to question farther; but I now
Profess my self the winner of her Honor,
Together with your Ring; and not the wronger
Of her, or you having proceeded but
By both your wills.

If you can mak't apparent
That you have tasted her in Bed; my hand,
And Ring is yours. If not, the foul opinion
You had of her pure Honor; gains, or looses,
Your Sword, or mine, or Masterlesse leave both
To who shall find them.

Sir, my Circumstances
Being so nere the Truth, as I will make them,
Must first induce you to believe; whose strength
I will confirm with oath, which I doubt not
You Will give me leave to spare, when you shall find
You need it not.

Proceed.


First, her Bedchamber
(Where I confess I slept not, but profess
Had that was well worth watching) it was hanged
With Tapistry of Silk, and Silver, the Story
Proud Cleopatra, when she met her Roman,
And Sidnus swelled above the Banks, or for
The press of Boats, or Pride. A piece of Work
So bravely done, so rich, that it did strive
In Workmanship, and Value, which I wondered
Could be so rarely, and exactly wrought
Since the true life on it was --

This is true:
And this you might have heard of here, by me,
Or by some other.

More particulars
Must justify my knowledge.

So they must,
Or do your Honor injury.

The Chimney
Is South the Chamber, and Chimney-peece
Chaste Dian, bathing: never saw I figures
So likely to report themselves; the Cutter
Was as another Nature dumb, out-went her,
Motion, and Breath left out.

This is a thing
Which you might from Relation likewise reap,
Being, as it is, much spoke of.

The Roof of the Chamber,
With golden Cherubins is fretted. Her Andirons
(I had forgot them) were two winking Cupids
Of Silver, each on one foot standing, nicely
Depending on their Brands.

This is her Honor:
Let it be granted you have seen all this (and praise
Be given to your remembrance) the description
Of what is in her Chamber, nothing saues
The wager you have laid.

Then if you can
Be pale, I beg but leave to air this Jewel: See,
And now it is up again: it must be married
To that your Diamond, I Will keep them.

Jove --
Once more let me behold it: Is it that
Which I left with her?

Sir (I thank her) that
She stripped it from her Arm: I see her yet:
Her pretty Action, did out-sell her gift,
And yet enriched it too: she gave it me,
And said, she prized it once.

May be, she plucked it off
To send it me.

She writes so to you? does she?


O no, no, no, it is true. Here, take this too,
It is a Basiliske unto mine eye,
Killes me to look on it: Let there be no Honor,
Where there is Beauty: Truth, where semblance: Love,
Where there is another man. The Vows of Women,
Of no more bondage be, to where they are made,
Then they are to their Virtues, which is nothing:
O, above measure false.

Have patience Sir,
And take your Ring again, it is not yet won:
It may be probable she lost it: or
Who knows if one her women, being corrupted
Has stolen it from her.

Very true,
And so I hope he came by it: back my Ring,
Render to me some corporal sign about her
More evident then this: for this was stolen.

By Jupiter, I had it from her Arm.


Hark you, he swears: by Jupiter he swears.
It Is true, nay keep the Ring; it is true: I am sure
She would not loose it: her Attendants are
All sworn, and honorable: they induced to steal it?
And by a Stranger? No, he has enjoyed her,
The Cognizance of her incontinencie
Is this: she has bought the name of Whore, thus deerly
There, take thy hyre, and all the Fiends of Hell
Divide themselves between you.

Sir, be patient:
This is not strong enough to be believed
Of one persuaded well of.

Never talk on it:
She has bin colted by him.

If you seek
For further satisfying, under her Breast
(Worthy her pressing) lies a Mole, right proud
Of that most delicate Lodging. By my life
I kissed it, and it gave me present hunger
To feed again, though full. You do remember
This stain upon her?

I, and it does confirm
Another stain, as big as Hell can hold,
Were there no more but it.

Will you hear more?


Spare your Arethmaticke,
Never count the Turns: Once, and a Million.

I Will be sworn.


No swearing:
If you will swear you have not done't, you lie,
And I will kill thee, if thou do deny
Thou'st made me Cuckold.

I Will deny nothing.


O that I had her here, to tear her Limb-meale:
I will go there and do it, in the Court, before
Her Father. I Will do something.

Quite besides
The government of Patience. You have won:
Let Us follow him, and pervert the present wrath
He has against himself.

With all my heart.


Is there no way for Men to be, but Women
Must be halfe-workers? We are all Bastards,
And that most venerable man, which I
Did call my Father, was, I know not where
When I was stamped. Some Coyner with his Tools
Made me a counterfeit: yet my Mother seemed
The Dian of that time: so does my Wife
The Non-pareill of this. Oh Vengeance, Vengeance!
Me of my lawful pleasure she restrained,
And prayed me often forbearance: did it with
A pudencie so Rosy, the sweet view on it
Might well have warmed old Saturn;
That I thought her
As Chaste, as vn-Sunn'd Snow. Oh, all the Devils!
This yellow Iachimo in an hour, was it not?
Or less; at first? Perchance he spoke not, but
Like a full Acorn'd Boar, a Iarmen on,
Cry'de oh, and mounted; found no opposition
But what he looked for, should oppose, and she
Should from encounter guard. Could I find out
The Woman's part in me, for there is no motion
That tends to vice in man, but I affirm
It is the Woman's part: be it Lying, note it,
The woman's: Flattering, hers; Deceiving, hers:
Lust, and rank thoughts, hers, hers: Reuenges hers:
Ambitions, Couetings, change of Prides, Disdain,
Nice-longing, Slanders, Mutability;
All Faults that name, nay, that Hell knows,
Why hers, in part, or all: but rather all For even to Vice
They are not constant, but are changing still;
One Vice, but of a minute old, for one
Not half so old as that. I Will write against them,
Detest them, curse them: yet it is greater Skill
In a true Hate, to pray they have their will:
The very Devils cannot plague them better.

Now say, what would Augustus Caesar with us?


When Julius Caesar (whose remembrance yet
Lives in men's eyes, and will to Ears and Tongues
Be Theme, and hearing ever) was in this Britain,
And Conquered it, Cassibulan thine Uncle
(Famous in Caesar's praises, no whit less
Then in his Feats deserving it) for him,
And his Succession, granted Rome a Tribute,
Yearly three thousand pounds; which (by thee) lately
Is left vntender'd.

And to kill the marvel,
Shall be so ever.

There be many Caesar's,
Ere such another Julius: Britaine's a world
By it self, and we will nothing pay
For wearing our own Noses.

That opportunity
Which then they had to take from's, to resume
We have again. Remember Sir, my Liege,
The Kings your Ancestors, together with
The natural bravery of your Isle, which stands
As Neptunes Park, ribb'd, and pal'd in
With Oaks vnskaleable, and roaring Waters,
With Sands that will not bear your Enemies Boats,
But suck them up to' the Topmast. A kind of Conquest
Caesar made here, but made not here his brag
Of Came, and Saw, and Ouer-came: with shame
(The first that ever touched him) he was carried
From off our Coast, twice beaten: and his Shipping
(Poor ignorant Baubles) on our terrible Seas
Like Egge-shels moved upon their Surges, cracked
As easily against our Rocks. For joy whereof,
The famed Cassibulan, who was once at point
(Oh giglet Fortune) to master Caesar's Sword,
Made Luds-Towne with reioycing-Fires bright,
And Britains strut with Courage.

Come, there is no more Tribute to be paid: our Kingdom is stronger then it was
at that time: and (as I said) there is no mo such Caesar's, other of them may
have crook'd Noses, but to owe such strait Arms, none


Son, let your Mother end.


We have yet many among us, can gripe as hard as Cassibulan, I do not say I am
one: but I have a hand. Why Tribute? Why should we pay Tribute? If Caesar can
hide the Sun from us with a Blanket, or put the Moon in his pocket, we will pay
him Tribute for light: else Sir, no more Tribute, pray you now


You must know,
Till the injurious Romans, did extort
This Tribute from us, we were free. Caesar's Ambition,
Which swelled so much, that it did almost stretch
The sides of the World, against all color here,
Did put the yoke vpon's; which to shake off
Becomes a warlike people, whom we reckon
Our selves to be, we do. Say then to Caesar,
Our Ancestor was that Mulmutius, which
Ordained our Laws, whose use the Sword of Caesar
Has too much mangled; whose repair, and franchise,
Shall (by the power we hold) be our good deed,
Tho Rome be therefore angry. Mulmutius made our laws
Who was the first of Britain, which did put
His brows within a golden Crown, and called
Himself a King.

I am sorry Cymbeline,
That I am to pronounce Augustus Caesar
( Caesar, that has more Kings his Servants, then
Thy self Domesticke Officers) thine Enemy:
Receive it from me then. War, and Confusion
In Caesar's name pronounce I against thee: Look
For fury, not to be resisted. Thus defide,
I thank thee for my self.

Thou art welcome Caius,
Thy Caesar Knighted me; my youth I spent
Much under him; of him, I gathered Honor,
Which he, to seek of me again, perforce,
Behooues me keep at utterance. I am perfect,
That the Pannonians and Dalmatians, for
Their Liberties are now in Arms: a President
Which not to read, would show the Britains cold:
So Caesar shall not find them.

Let proof speak.


His Majesty biddes you welcome. Make pastime with us, a day, or two, or
longer: if you seek us afterward in other terms, you shall find us in our
Salt-water-Girdle: if you beat us out of it, it is yours: if you fall in the
adventure, our Crows shall fare the better for you: and there is an end


So sir.


I know your Masters pleasure, and he mine:
All the Remain, is welcome.

How? of Adultery? Wherefore write you not
What Monsters her accuse? Leonatus:
Oh Master, what a strange infection
Is fallen into thy ear? What false Italian,
(As poisonous tongued, as handed) has prevailed
On thy too ready hearing? Disloyal? No.
She Is punished for her Truth; and undergoes
More Goddesse-like, then Wife-like; such Assaults
As would take in some Virtue. Oh my Master,
Thy mind to her, is now as low, as were
Thy Fortunes. How? That I should murder her,
Upon the Love, and Truth, and Vows; which I
Have made to thy command? I her? Her blood?
If it be so, to go do od service, never
Let me be counted serviceable. How look I,
That I should seem to lack humanity,
So much as this Fact comes to? Do It: The Letter.
That I have sent her, by her own command,
Shall give thee opportunity. Oh damned paper,
Black as the Incke that is on thee: senseless bauble,
Art thou a Foedarie for this Act; and look
So Virgin-like without? Lo her she comes.
I am ignorant in what I am commanded.

How now Pisanio?


Madam, here is a Letter from my Lord.


Who, thy Lord? That is my Lord Leonatus?
Oh, learned indeed were that Astronomer
That knew the Stars, as I his Characters,
Heel'd lay the Future open. You good Gods,
Let what is here contained, relish of Love,
Of my Lords health, of his content: yet not
That we two are asunder, let that grieve him;
Some griefs are medcinable, that is one of them,
For it does physic Love, of his content,
All but in that. Good Wax, thy leave: blessed be
You Bees that make these Locks of counsel. Lovers,
And men in dangerous Bonds pray not alike,
Though Forfeytours you cast in prison, yet
You claspe young Cupids Tables: good News Gods.
Justice, and your Fathers wrath (should he take me in his Dominion) could not
be so cruel to me, as you: (oh the dearest of Creatures) would even renew me
with your eyes. Take notic^ (...) I am in Cambria at Milford-Hauen: what your
own Love, will out of this advise you, follow. So he wishes you all
happiness, that remains loyal to his Vow, and your increasing in Love

Leonatus-Posthumus.



Oh for a Horse with wings: Hear'st thou Pisanio?
He is at Milford-Hauen: Read, and tell me
How far it is thither. If one of mean affairs
May plod it in a week, why may not I
Glide thither in a day? Then true Pisanio,
Who long'st like me, to see thy Lord; who long'st
(Oh let me bate) but not like me: yet long'st
But in a fainter kind. Oh not like me:
For mine is beyond, beyond: say, and speak thick
(Loves Counsailor should fill the bores of hearing,
To' the smothering of the Sense) how far it is
To this same blessed Milford. And by' the way
Tell me how Wales: was made so happy, as
T'inherite such a Haven. But first of all,
How we may steal from hence: nd for the gap
That we shall make in Time, from our hence-going,
And our return, to excuse: but first, how get hence.
Why should excuse be borne or ere begot?
We Will talk of that hereafter. Prithee speak,
How many store of Miles may we well rid
Twixt hour, and hour?

One score 'twixt Sun, and Sun,
Madam's enough for you: and too much too.

Why, one that rode to's Excution Man,
Could never go so slow: I have heard of Riding wagers,
Where Horses have bin nimbler then the Sands
That run in the Clocks behalf. But this is Foolrie,
Go, bid my Woman faigne a Sickness, say
She Will home to her Father; and provide me presently
A Riding Suit: No costlier then would fit
A Franklins Huswife.

Madam, you're best consider.


I see before me (Man) nor here, not here;
Nor what ensues but have a Fog in them
That I cannot look through. Away, I prithee,
Do as I bid thee: There Is no more to say:
Accessible is none but Milford way.

A goodly day, not to keep house with such,
Whose Roofe's as low as ours: Sleep Boys, this gate
Instructs you how to adore the Heavens; and bows you
To a mornings holy office. The Gates of Monarchs
Are Arched so high, that Giants may ^et through
And keep their impious Turbonds on, without
Good morrow to the Sun. Hail thou fair Heaven,
We house in the Rock, yet use thee not so hardly
As prouder livers do.

Hail Heaven.


Hail Heaven.


Now for our Mountain sport, up to yond hill
Your legs are young: I Will tread these Flats. Consider,
When you above perceive me like a Crow,
That it is Place, which lessen's, and sets off,
And you may then reuolue what Tales, I have told you,
Of Courts, of Princes; of the Tricks in War.
This Service, is not Service; so being done,
But being so allowed. To apprehend thus,
Draws us a profit from all things we see:
And osten to our comfort, shall we find
The sharded-Beetle, in a safer hold
Then is the full-wing'd Eagle. Oh this life,
Is Nobler, then attending for a check:
Richer, then doing nothing for a Babe:
Prouder, then rustling in vnpayd-for Silk:
Such gain the Cap of him, that makes him fine,
Yet keeps his Book vncros'd: no life to ours.

Out of your proof you speak: we poor vnfledg'd
Have never winged from view of the nest; nor knows not
What Ayre's from home. Hap'ly this life is best,
(If quiet life be best) sweeter to you
That have a sharper known. Well corresponding
With your stiff Age; but unto us, it is
A Cell of Ignorance: travailing a bed,
A Prison, or a Debtor, that not dares
To stride a limit.

What should we speak of
When we are old as you? When we shall hear
The Rain and wind beat dark December? How
In this our pinching Cave, shall we discourse
The freezing hours away? We have seen nothing:
We are beastly; subtle as the Fox for prey,
Like warlike as the Wolf, for what we eat:
Our Valor is to chase what flies: Our Cage
We make a Quite, as does the imprisoned Bird,
And sing our Bondage freely.

How you speak.
Did you but know the Cities Vsuries,
And felt them knowingly: the Art of the Court,
As hard to leave, as keep: whose top to climb
Is certain falling: or so slippery, that
The feare's as bad as falling. The toil of the War,
A pain that only seems to seek out danger
IN the name of Fame and Honor, which dies in the search,
And has as often a sland'rous Epitaph,
As Record of fair Act. Nay, many times
Does ill deserve, by doing well: what is worse
Must curt'sie at the Censure. Oh Boys, this Story
The World may read in me: My body's marked
With Roman Swords; and my report, was once
First, with the best of Note. Cymbeline loved me,
And when a Soldier was the Theme, my name
Was not far off: then was I as a Tree
Whose boughs did bend with fruit. But in one night,
A Storm, or Robbery (call it what you will)
Shook down my mellow hangings: nay my Leaves,
And left me bare to weather.

Uncertain favor.


My fault being nothing (as I have told you often)
But that two Villains, whose false Oaths preuayl'd
Before my perfect Honor, swore to Cymbeline,
I was Confederate with the Romans: so
Followed my Banishment, and this twenty years,
This Rock, and these Demesnes, have been my World,
Where I have lived at honest freedom, paid
More pious debts to Heaven, then in all
The fore-end of my time. But, up to' the Mountains,
This is not Hunters Language; he that strikes
The Venison first, shall be the Lord of the Feast,
To him the other two shall minister,
And we will fear no poison, which attends
In place of greater State:
I Will meet you in the Valleys.
How hard it is to hide the sparks of Nature?
These Boys know little they are Sons to' the King,
Nor Cymbeline dreams that they are alive.
They think they are mine,
And though trained up thus meanly
IN the Cave, whereon the Bow their thoughts do hit,
The Roofes of Palaces, and Nature prompts them
In simple and low things, to Prince it, much
Beyond the trick of others. This Paladour,
The heir of Cymbeline and Britain, who
The King his Father called Guiderius. Jove,
When on my three-foot stool I sit, and tell
The warlike feats I have done, his spirits fly out
Into my Story: say thus mine Enemy fell,
And thus I set my foot on's neck, even then
The Princely blood flows in his Cheek, he sweats,
Strains his young Nerves, and puts himself in posture
That acts my words. The younger Brother Cadwall,
Once Aruiragus, in as like a figure
Strikes life into my speech, and shows much more
His own conceyuing. Hark, the Game is roused,
Oh Cymbeline, Heaven and my Conscience knows
Thou didd'st unjustly banish me: whereon
At three, and two years old, I stole these Babes,
Thinking to bar thee of Succession, as
Thou refts me of my Lands. Euriphile,
Thou was it their Nurse, they took thee for their mother,
And every day do honor to her grave:
My self Belarius, that am Mergan called
They take for Natural Father. The Game is up.

Thou told'st me when we came from horse, ye place
Was near at hand: Never longed my Mother so
To see me first, as I have now. Pisanio, Man:
Where is Posthumus? What is in thy mind
That makes thee stare thus? Wherefore breaks that sigh
From the inward of thee? One, but painted thus
Would be interpreted a thing perplexed
Beyond selfe-explication. Put thy self
Into a hauiour of less fear, ere wildness
Vanquish my stayder Senses. What Is the matter?
Why tender'st thou that Paper to me, with
A look vntender? If It be Summer News
Smile to it before: if Winterly, thou need'st
But keep that countenance still. My Husbands hand?
That Drug-damn'd Italy, has out-craftied him,
And he is at some hard point. Speak man, thy Tongue
May take off some extreamitie, which to read
Would be even mortal to me.

Please you read,
And you shall find me (wretched man) a thing
The most disdained of Fortune.

THy Mistress (Pisanio) has plaide the Strumpet in my Bed: the Testimonies
whereof, lies bleeding in me. I speak not out of weak Surmises, but from
proof as strong as my grief, and as certain as I expect my Revenge. The
(...), thou (Pisanio) must act for me, if thy Faith be not tainted with the
breach of hers; let thine own hands take away her life: I shall give thee
opportunity at Milford Haven. She has my Letter for the purpose; where, if
thou fear to strike, and to make me certain it is done, thou art the Pander
to her dishonor, and equally to me disloyal


What shall I need to draw my Sword, the Paper
Has cut her throat already? No, it is Slander,
Whose edge is sharper then the Sword, whose tongue
Out-venomes all the Worms of Nyle, whose breath
Rides on the posting winds, and does belie
All corners of the World. Kings, Queens, and States,
Maids, Matrons, nay the Secrets of the Grave
This viperous slander enters. What cheer, Madam?

False to his Bed? What is it to be false?
To lie in watch there, and to think on him?
To weep 'twixt clock and clock? If sleep charge Nature,
To break it with a fearful dream of him,
And cry my self awake? That Is false to's bed? Is it?

Alas good Lady.


I false? Thy Conscience witness: Iachimo,
Thou didd'st accuse him of Incontinencie,
Thou then look'dst like a Villain: now, me thinks
Thy favors good enough. Some Iay of Italy
(Whose mother was her painting) has betrayed him:
Poor I am stale, a Garment out of fashion,
And for I am richer then to hang by the walls,
I must be ripped: To pieces with me: Oh!
Men's Vows are women's Traitors. All good seeming
By thy revolt (o^ Husband) shall be thought
Put on for Villainy; not borne where't grows,
But worn a Bait for Ladies.

Good Madam, hear me.


True honest men being heard, like false Aeneas,
Were in his time thought false: and Synons weeping
Did scandal many a holy tear: took pity
From most true wretchedness. So thou, Posthumus
Wilt lay the Leaven on all proper men;
Goodly, and gallant, shall be false and perjured
From thy great fail: Come Fellow, be thou honest,
Do thou thy Masters bidding. When thou see him,
A little witness my obedience. Look
I draw the Sword my self, take it, and hit
The innocent Mansion of my Love (my Heart:)
Fear not, it is empty of all things, but Grief:
Thy Master is not there, who was indeed
The riches of it. Do his bidding, strike,
Thou may be valiant in a better cause;
But now thou seem a Coward.

Hence vile Instrument,
Thou shall not damn my hand.

Why, I must dye:
And if I do not by thy hand, thou art
No Servant of thy Masters. Against Selfe-slaughter,
There is a prohibition so Divine,
That crauens my weak hand: Come, here is my heart:
Something's a-foot: Soft, soft, we will no defense,
Obedient as the Scabbard. What is here,
The Scriptures of the Loyal Leonatus,
All turned to Heresy? Away, away
Corrupters of my Faith, you shall no more
Be Stomachers to my heart: thus may poor Fools
Believe false Teachers: Though those that are betrayed
Do feel the Treason sharply, yet the Traitor
S^ (...) in worse case of woe. And thou Posthumus,
That didd'st set up my disobedience against the King
My Father, and makes me put into contempt the suites
Of Princely Fellows, shall hereafter find
It is no act of common passage, but
A strain of Rareness: and I grieve my self,
To think, when thou shall be disedg'd by her,
That now thou tyreft on, how thy memory
Will then be pang'd by me. Prithee dispatch,
The Lamb entreats the Butcher. Where Is thy knife?
Thou art too slow to do thy Masters bidding
When I desire it too.

Oh gracious Lady:
Since I received command to do this business,
I have not slept one wink.

Do It, and to bed then.


I Will wake mine eye-balles first.


Wherefore then
Didd'st undertake it? Why have thou abused
So many Miles, with a pretense? This place?
Mine Action? and thine own? Our Horses labor?
The Time inuiting thee? The perturb'd Court
For my being absent? whereunto I never
Purpose return. Why have thou gone so far
To be vn-bent? when thou have 'ta^e thy stand,
The elected Dear before thee?

But to win time
To loose so bad employment, in the which
I have considered of a course: good Lady
Hear me with patience.

Talk thy tongue weary, speak:
I have heard I am a Strumpet, and mine ear
Therein false struck, can take no greater wound,
Nor tent, to bottom that. But speak.

Then Madam,
I thought you would not back again.

Most like,
Bringing me here to kill me.

Not so neither:
But if I were as wise, as honest, then
My purpose would prove well: it cannot be,
But that my Master is abused. Some Villain,
I, and singular in his Art, has done you both
This cursed injury.

Some Roman Curtezan?


No, on my life:
I Will give but notice you are dead, and send him
Some bloody sign of it. For it is commanded
I should do so: you shall be mist at Court,
And that will well confirm it.

Why good Fellow,
What shall I do the while? Where bide? How live?
Or in my life, what comfort, when I am
Dead to my Husband?

If you will back to' the Court.


No Court, no Father, nor no more ado
With that harsh, noble, simple nothing:
That Clotten, whose Loue-suite has been to me
As fearful as a Siege.

If not at Court,
Then not in Britain must you bide.

Where then?
Has Britain all the Sun that shines? Day? Night?
Are they not but in Britain? IN the worlds Volume
Our Britain seems as of it, but not in it:
In a great Poole, a Swannes-nest, prithee think
There Is livers out of Britain.

I am most glad
You think of other place: The Ambassador,
Lucius the Roman comes to Milford-Hauen
To morrow. Now, if you could wear a mind
Dark, as your Fortune is, and but disguise
That which t'appeare it self, must not yet be,
But by selfe-danger, you should tread a course
Pretty, and full of view: yea, happily, near
The residence of Posthumus; so nie (at least)
That though his Actions were not visible, yet
Report should render him hourly to your ear,
As truly as he mooues.

Oh for such means,
Though peril to my modesty, not death on it
I would adventure.

Well then, here is the point:
You must forget to be a Woman: change
Command, into obedience. Fear, and Niceness
(The Handmaides of all Women, or more truly
Woman it pretty self) into a waggish courage,
Ready in gybes, quicke-answer'd, saucy, and
As quarrellous as the Weazell: Nay, you must
Forget that rarest Treasure of your Cheek,
Exposing it (but oh the harder heart,
Alack no remedy) to the greedy touch
Of common-kissing Titan: and forget
Your laboursome and dainty Trimmes, wherein
You made great Juno angry.

Nay be brief?
I see into thy end, and am almost
A man already.

First, make your self but like one,
Fore-thinking this. I have already fit
('It Is in my Cloake-bagge) Doublet, Hat, Hose, all
That answer to them: Would you in their serving,
(And with what imitation you can borrow
From youth of such a season) before Noble Lucius
Present your self, desire his service: tell him
Wherein you're happy; which will make him know,
If that his head have ear in Music, doubtless
With joy he will embrace you: for he is Honorable,
And doubling that, most holy. Your means abroad:
You have me rich, and I will never fail
Beginning, nor supplyment.

Thou art all the comfort
The Gods will diet me with. Prithee away,
There Is more to be considered: but we will even
All that good time will give us. This attempt,
I am Soldier too, and will abide it with
A Princes Courage. Away, I prithee.

Well Madam, we must take a short farewell,
Least being mist, I be suspected of
Your carriage from the Court. My Noble Mistress,
Here is a box, I had it from the Queen,
What Is in it is precious: If you are sick at Sea,
Or Stomacke-qualm'd at Land, a Dram of this
Will drive away distemper. To some shade,
And fit you to your Manhood: may the Gods
Direct you to the best.

Amen: I thank thee.


Thus far, and so fare well.


Thanks, Royal Sir:
My Emperor has wrote, I must from hence,
And am right sorry, that I must report ye
My Masters Enemy.

Our Subjects (Sir)
Will not endure his yoke; and for our self
To show less Sovereignty then they, must needs
Appear vn-Kinglike.

So Sir: I desire of you
A Conduct over Land, to Milford-Hauen.
Madam, all joy befall your Grace, and you.

My Lords, you are appointed for that Office:
The due of Honor, in no point omit:
So farewell Noble Lucius.

Your hand, my Lord.


Receive it friendly: but from this time forth
I wear it as your Enemy.

Sir, the Event
Is yet to name the winner. Fare you well.

Leave not the worthy Lucius, good my Lords
Till he have crossed the Seuern* Happiness.

He goes hence frowning: but it honors us
That we have given him cause.

It Is all the better,
Your valiant Britains have their wishes in it.

Lucius has wrote already to the Emperor
How it goes here. It fits us therefore ripely
Our Chariots, and our Horsemen be in readiness:
The Powers that he already has in Gallia
Will soon be drawn to head, from whence he moves
His war for Britain.

It Is not sleepy business,
But must be looked too speedily, and strongly.

Our expectation that it would be thus
Has made us forward. But my gentle Queen,
Where is our Daughter? She has not appeared
Before the Roman, nor to us has tendered
The duty of the day. She look us like
A thing more made of malice, then of duty,
We have noted it. Call her before us, for
We have been too slight in sufferance.

Royal Sir,
Since the exile of Posthumus, most retired
Has her life bin: the Cure whereof, my Lord.
It Is time must do. Beseech your Majesty,
Forbear sharp speeches to her. She Is a Lady
So tender of rebukes, that words are stroke;,
And strokes death to her.

Where is she Sir? How
Can her contempt be answered?

Please you Sir,
Her Chambers are all locked, and there is no answer
That will be given to' the loud of noise, we make.

My Lord, when last I went to visit her,
She prayed me to excuse her keeping close,
Whereto constrained by her infirmity,
She should that duty leave unpaid to you
Which daily she was bound to proffer: this
She wished me to make known: but our great Court
Made me too blame in memory.

Her doors locked?
Not seen of late? Grant Heavens, that which I
Fear, prove false.

Son, I say, follow the King.


That man of hers, Pisanio, her old Servant
I have not seen these two days.

Go, look after:
Pisanio, thou that stand'st so for Posthumus,
He has a Drugge of mine: I pray, his absence
Proceed by swallowing that. For he believes
It is a thing most precious. But for her,
Where is she gone? Happily despair has seized her:
Or winged with fervor of her love, she is flowne
To her desired Posthumus: gone she is,
To death, or to dishonor, and my end
Can make good use of either. She being down,
I have the placing of the British Crown.
How now, my Son?

It Is certain she is fled:
Go in and cheer the King, he rages, none
Dare come about him.

All the better: may
This night fore-stall him of the coming day.

I love, and hate her: for she is Fair and Royal,
And that she has all courtly parts more exquisite
Then Lady, Ladies, Woman, from every one
The best she has, and she of all compounded
Out-selles them all. I love her therefore, but
Disdaining me, and throwing Favors on
The low Posthumus, slanders so her judgment,
That what is else rare, is choked: and in that point
I will conclude to hate her, nay indeed,
To be revenged upon her. For, when Fools shall --
Who is here? What, are you packing sirrah?
Come hither: Ah you precious Pandar, Villain,
Where is thy Lady? In a word, or else
Thou art straightway with the Fiends.

Oh, good my Lord.


Where is thy Lady? Or, by Jupiter,
I will not ask again. Close Villain,
I Will have this Secret from thy heart, or rip
Thy heart to find it. Is she with Posthumus?
From whose so many waights of baseness, cannot
A dram of worth be drawn.

Alas, my Lord,
How can she be with him? When was she missed?
He is in Rome*

Where is she Sir? Come nearer:
No farther halting: satisfy me home,
What is become of her?

Oh, my all-worthy Lord.


All-worthy Villain,
Discover where thy Mistress is, at once,
At the next word: no more of worthy Lord:
Speak, or thy silence on the instant, is
Thy condemnation, and thy death.

Then Sir:
This Paper is the history of my knowledge
Touching her flight.

Let Us see it: I will pursue her
Even to Augustus Throne.

Or this, or perish.
She Is far enough, and what he learnes by this,
May prove his travel, not her danger.

Humh.


I Will write to my Lord she is dead: Oh Imogen,
Safe may thou wander, safe return again.

Sir, is this Letter true?


Sir, as I think.


It is Posthumus hand, I know it. Sirrah, if thou would not be a Villain, but
do me true service: undergo those Employments wherein I should have cause to use
thee with a serious industry, that is, what villainy soere I bid thee do to
perform it, directly and truly, I would think thee an honest man: thou
should neither want my means for thy relief, nor my voice for thy
preferment


Well, my good Lord.


Will thou serve me? For since patiently and constantly thou have stuck to
the bare Fortune of that Beggar Posthumus, thou can not in the course of
gratitude, but be a diligent follower of mine. Will thou serve me


Sir, I will.


Give me thy hand, here is my purse. Have any of thy late Masters Garments in
thy possession


I have (my Lord) at my Lodging, the same Suite he wore, when he took leave of
my Lady and Mistress


The first service thou do me, fetch that Suite hither, let it be thy first
service, go


I shall my Lord.


Meet thee at Milford-Hauen: (I forgot to ask him one thing, I Will remember't
anon:) even there, thou villain Posthumus will I kill thee. I would these
Garments were come. She said upon a time (the bitterness of it, I now belch
from my heart) that she held the very Garment of Posthumus, in more respect,
then my Noble and natural person; together with the adornement of my
Qualities. With that Suite upon my back will I ravish her: first kill him, and
in her eyes; there shall she see my valor, which will then be a torment to her
contempt. He on the ground, my speech of insulment ended on his dead body, and
when my Lust has dined (which as I say, to vex her, I will execute in the
Clothes that she so praised:) to the Court I Will knock her back, foot her home
again. She has despised me reioycingly, and I Will be merry in my Revenge

Be those the Garments?


I, my Noble Lord.


How long is it since she went to Milford-Hauen?


She can scarce be there yet.


Bring this Apparel to my Chamber, that is the second thing that I have
commanded thee. The third is, that thou will be a voluntary Mute to my
design. Be but dutious, and true preferment shall render it self to thee. My
Revenge is now at Milford, would I had wings to follow it. Come, and be true


Thou bid'st me to my loss: for true to thee,
Were to prove false, which I will never be
To him that is most true. To Milford go*
And find not her, whom thou pursuest. Flow, flow
You Heavenly blessings on her: This Fools speed
Be crossed with slownesse; Labor be his me^de.

I see a man's life is a tedious one,
I have tired my self: and for two nights together
Have made the ground my bed. I should be sick,
But that my resolution helps me: Milford,
When from the Mountain top, Pisanio showed thee,
Thou was it within a kenne. Oh Jove, I think
Foundations fly the wretched: such I mean,
Where they should be releeu'd. Two Beggars told me,
I could not miss my way. Will poor Folks lie
That have Afflictions on them, knowing it is
A punishment, or Trial? Yes; no wonder,
When Rich-ones scarce tell true. To lapse in Fullness
Is sorer, then to lie for Need: and Falsehood
Is worse in Kings, then Beggars. My dear Lord,
Thou art one of the false Ones: Now I think on thee,
My hunger's gone; but even before, I was
At point to sink, for Food. But what is this?
Here is a path to it* it is some savage hold:
I were best not call; I dare not call: yet Famine
Ere clean it o're-throw Nature, makes it valiant.
Plenty, and Peace breeds Cowards: Hardness ever
Of Hardiness is Mother. Hoa? who is here?
If any thing that is civil, speak: if savage,
Take, or lend. Hoa? No answer? Then I Will enter.
Best draw my Sword; and if mine Enemy
But fear the Sword like me, he will scarsely look on it.
Such a Foe, good Heavens.

You Polidore have proved best Woodman, and
Are Master of the Feast: Cadwall, and I
Will play the Cook, and Servant, it is our match:
The sweat of industry would dry, and dye
But for the end it works too. Come, our stomachs
Will make what is homely, sauoury: Weariness
Can snore upon the Flint, when restie Sloth
Finds the Downe-pillow hard. Now peace be here,
Poor house, that keep'st thy self.

I am thoroughly weary.


I am weak with toil, yet strong in appetite.


There is cold meat in the Cave, we will brouz on that
Whilst what we have killed, be Cooked.

Stay, come not in:
But that it eats our victualles, I should think
Here were a Faiery.

What Is the matter, Sir?


By Jupiter an Angel: or if not
An earthly Paragon. Behold Divineness
No elder then a Boy.

Good masters harm me not:
Before I entered here, I called, and thought
To have begged, or bought, what I have took: good troth
I have stolen naught, nor would not, though I had found
Gold strewn in the Floor. Here Is money for my Meat,
I would have left it on the Board, so soon
As I had made my Meal; and parted
With Prayers for the Prouider.

Money? Youth.


All Gold and Silver rather turn to dirt,
As it is no better reckoned, but of those
Who worship durty Gods.

I see you're angry:
Know, if you kill me for my fault, I should
Have dyed, had I not made it.

Whether bound?


To Milford-Hauen.


What Is your name?


Fidele Sir: I have a Kinsman, who
Is bound for Italy; he embarked at Milford,
To whom being going, almost spent with hunger,
I am fallen in this offense.

Prithee (fair youth)
Think us no Churles: nor measure our good minds
By this rude place we live in. Well encountered,
It Is almost night, you shall have better cheer
Ere you depart; and thanks to stay, and eat it.
Boys, bid him welcome.

Were you a woman, youth,
I should woo hard, but be your Groom in honesty:
I bid for you, as I do buy.

I Will make it my Comfort
He is a man, I Will love him as my Brother:
And such a welcome as I Would give to him
(After long absence) such is yours. Most welcome:
Be sprightly, for you fall amongst Friends.

Amongst Friends?
If Brothers: would it had bin so, that they
Had bin my Fathers Sons, then had my prize
Bin less, and so more equal ballasting
To thee Posthumus.

He wrings at some distress.


Would I could free't.


Or I, what ere it be,
What pain it cost, what danger: Gods!

Hark Boys.


Great men
That had a Court no bigger then this Cave,
That did attend themselves, and had the virtue
Which their own Conscience sealed them: laying by
That nothing-guift of differing Multitudes
Could not out-peere these twain. Pardon me Gods,
I Would change my sex to be Companion with them,
Since Leonatus false.

It shall be so:
Boys we will go dress our Hunt. Fair youth come in;
Discourse is heavy, fasting: when we have supped
We Will mannerly demand thee of thy Story,
So far as thou will speak it.

Pray draw near.


The Night to' the Owl,
And Morn to the Lark less welcome.

Thanks Sir.


I pray draw near.


This is the tenor of the Emperors Writ;
That since the common men are now in Action
Against the Pannonians, and Dalmatians,
And that the Legions now in Gallia, are
Full weak to undertake our Wars against
The falne-off Britains, that we do incite
The Gentry to this business. He creates
Lucius Pro-Consull: and to you the Tribunes
For this immediate Leuy, he commands
His absolute Commission. Long live Caesar.

Is Lucius General of the Forces?


I.


Remaining now in Gallia?


With those Legions
Which I have spoke of, whereunto your levy
Must be suppliant: the words of your Commission
Will tie you to the numbers, and the time
Of their dispatch.

We will discharge our duty.


I am near to' the place where they should meet, if Pisanio have mapp'd it
truly. How fit his Garments serve me? Why should his Mistress who was made by
him that made the Tailor, not be fit too? The rather (saving reverence of the
Word) for it is said a Woman's fitness comes by fits: therein I must play the
Workman, I dare speak it to my self, for it is not Vainglorie for a man, and
his Glass, to confer in his own Chamber; I mean, the Lines of my body are as
well drawn as his; no less young, more strong, not beneath him in Fortunes,
beyond him in the advantage of the time, above him in Birth, alike conversant
in general services, and more remarkable in single oppositions; yet this
imperseuerant Thing loves him in my despite. What Mortality is? Posthumus,
thy head (which now is growing upon thy shoulders) shall within this hour be
off, thy Mistress enforced, thy Garments cut to pieces before thy face: and all
this done, spurn her home to her Father, who may (happily) be a little angry
for my so rough usage: but my Mother having power of his testiness, shall
turn all into my commendations. My Horse is tied up safe, out Sword, and to a
sore purpose: Fortune put them into my hand: This is the very description of
their meeting place and the Fellow dares not deceive me


You are not well: Remain here in the Cave,
We Will come to you after Hunting.

Brother, stay here:
Are we not Brothers?

So man and man should be,
But Clay and Clay, differs in dignity,
Whose dust is both alike. I am very sick,

Go you to Hunting, I Will abide with him.


So sick I am not, yet I am not well:
But not so Citizen a wanton, as
To seem to dye, ere sick: So please you, leave me,
Stick to your Iournall course: the breach of Custom,
Is breach of all. I am ill, but your being by me
Cannot amend me. Society, is no comfort
To one not sociable: I am not very sick,
Since I can reason of it: pray you trust me here,
I Will rob none but my self, and let me dye
Stealing so poorly.

I love thee: I have spoke it,
How much the quantity, the weight as much,
As I do love my Father.

What? How? how?


If it be sin to say so (Sir) I yoke me
In my good Brothers fault: I know not why
I love this youth, and I have heard you say,
Love's reason's, without reason. The Beer at door,
And a demand who is it shall dye, I Would say
My Father, not this youth.

Oh noble strain!
O worthiness of Nature, breed of Greatness!
"Cowards father Cowards, and Base things Sire Bace;
"Nature has Meal, and Bran; Contempt, and Grace.
I Am not their Father, yet who this should be,
Does miracle it self, loved before me.
It Is the ninth hour of the Morn.

Brother, farewell.


I wish ye sport.


You health. -- So please you Sir.


These are kind Creatures.
Gods, what lies I have heard:
Our Courtiers say, all is savage, but at Court;
Experience, oh thou disproou'st Report.
The emperious Seas breeds Monsters; for the Dish,
Poor Tributary Rivers, as sweet Fish:
I am sick still, heart-sicke; Pisanio,
I Will now taste of thy Drugge.

I could not stir him:
He said he was gentle, but unfortunate;
Dishonestly afflicted, but yet honest.

Thus did he answer me: yet said hereafter,
I might know more.

To' the Field, to' the Field:
We Will leave you for this time, go in, and rest.

We Will not be long away.


Pray be not sick,
For you must be our Huswife.

Well, or ill.
I am bound to you.

And shal't be ever.
This youth, how ere distressed, appears he has had
Good Ancestors.

How Angell-like he sings?


But his neat Cookerie?


He cut our Roots in Charracters,
And sawc'st our Brothes, as Juno had bin sick,
And he her Dieter.

Nobly he yoakes
A smiling, with a sigh; as if the sighe
Was that it was, for not being such a Smile:
The Smile, mocking the Sigh, that it would fly
From so divine a Temple, to commix
With winds, that Saylors rail at.

I do note,
That grief and patience rooted in them both,
Mingle their spurs together.

Grow patient,
And let the stinking-Elder (Grief) untwine
His perishing root, with the increasing Vine.

It is great morning. Come away: Who Is there?


I cannot find those Runnagates, that Villain
Has mocked me. I am faint.

Those Runnagates?
Means he not us? I partly know him, it is
Cloten, the Son of the Queen. I fear some Ambush:
I saw him not these many years, and yet
I know it is he: We are held as Out-Lawes: Hence.

He is but one: you, and my Brother search
What Companies are near: pray you away,
Let me alone with him.

Soft, what are you
That fly me thus? Some villaine-Mountainers?
I have heard of such. What Slave art thou?

A thing.
More slavish did I never, then answering
A Slave without a knock.

Thou art a Robber,
A Law-breaker, a Villain: yield thee Thief.

To who? to thee? What art thou? Have not I
An arm as big as thine? A heart, as big:
Thy words I grant are bigger: for I wear not
My Dagger in my mouth. Say what thou art:
Why I should yield to thee?

Thou Villain base,
Know me not by my Clothes?

No, nor thy Tailor, Rascal:
Who is thy Grandfather? He made those clothes,
Which (as it seems) make thee.

Thou precious Varlet,
My Tailor made them not.

Hence then, and thank
The man that gave them thee. Thou art some Fool,
I am loath to beat thee.

Thou injurious Thief,
Hear but my name, and tremble.

What Is thy name?


Cloten, thou Villain.


Cloten, thou double Villain be thy name,
I cannot tremble at it, were it Toad, or Adder, Spider,
'Twould move me sooner.

To thy further fear,
Nay, to thy mere Confusion, thou shall know
I am Son to' the Queen.

I am sorry for 't: not seeming
So worthy as thy Birth.

Art not afeard?


Those that I reverence, those I fear: the Wise:
At Fools I laugh: not fear them.

Dye the death:
When I have slain thee with my proper hand,
I Will follow those that even now fled hence:
And on the Gates of Luds-Towne set your heads:
Yield Rusticke Mountaineer.

No Companie's abroad?


None in the world: you did mistake him sure.


I cannot tell: Long is it since I saw him,
But Time has nothing blurred those lines of Favor
Which then he wore: the snatches in his voice,
And burst of speaking were as his: I am absolute
'Twas very Cloten.

In this place we left them;
I wish my Brother make good time with him,
You say he is so fell.

Being scarce made up,
I mean to man; he had not apprehension
Of roaring terrors: For defect of judgment
Is often the cause of Fear.
But see thy Brother.

This Cloten was a Fool, an empty purse,
There was no money in it: Not Hercules
Could have knocked out his Brains, for he had none:
Yet I not doing this, the Fool had borne
My head, as I do his.

What have thou done?


I am perfect what: cut off one Clotens head,
Son to the Queen (after his own report)
Who called me Traitor, Mountaineer, and swore
With his own single hand heel'd take us in,
Displace our heads, where (thanks the Gods) they grow
And set them on Luds-Towne.

We are all undone.


Why, worthy Father, what have we to loose,
But that he swore to take, our Lives? the Law
Protects not us, then why should we be tender,
To let an arrogant piece of flesh threat us?
Play Judge, and Executioner, all himself?
For we do fear the Law. What company
Discover you abroad?

No single soul
Can we set eye on: but in all safe reason
He must have some Attendants. Though his Honor
Was nothing but mutation, I, and that
From one bad thing to worse: Not Frenzy,
Not absolute madness could so far have rau'd
To bring him here alone: although perhaps
It may be heard at Court, that such as we
Cave here, hunt here, are Out-lawes, and in time
May make some stronger head, the which he hearing,
(As it is like him) might break out, and swear
Heel'd fetch us in, yet is it not probable
To come alone, either he so undertaking,
Or they so suffering: then on good ground we fear,
If we do fear this Body has a tail
More perilous then the head.

Let Ord'nance
Come as the Gods fore-say it: howsoere,
My Brother has done well.

I had no mind
To hunt this day: The Boy Fideles sickness
Did make my way long forth.

With his own Sword,
Which he did wave against my throat, I have taken
His head from him: I Will throw 't into the Creek
Behind our Rock, and let it to the Sea,
And tell the Fishes, he is the Queens Son, Cloten,
That Is all I reake.

I fear 'twill be revenged:
Would (Polidore) thou had not done 't: though valor
Becomes thee well enough.

Would I had done 't:
So the Revenge alone pursu'de me: Polidore
I love thee brotherly, but envy much
Thou have robbed me of this deed: I would Reuenges
That possible strength might meet, would seek us through
And put us to our answer.

Well, it is done:
We Will hunt no more to day, nor seek for danger
Where there is no profit. I prithee to our Rock,
You and Fidele play the Cooks: I Will stay
Till hasty Polidore return, and bring him
To dinner presently.

Poor sick Fidele.
I Will willingly to him, to gain his color,
Il'd let a parish of such Clotens blood,
And praise my self for charity.

Oh thou Goddess,
Thou divine Nature; thou thy self thou blazon'st
In these two Princely Boys: they are as gentle
As Zephires blowing below the Violet,
Not wagging his sweet head; and yet, as rough
(Their Royal blood enchaf'd) as the rud'st wind,
That by the top does take the Mountain Pine,
And make him stoop to the Vale. It Is wonder
That an invisible instinct should frame them
To Royalty vnlearn'd, Honor untaught,
Ciuility not seen from other: valor
That wildely grows in them, but yields a crop
As if it had been fow'd: yet still it is strange
What Clotens being here to us portends,
Or what his death will bring us.

Where Is my Brother?
I have sent Clotens Clot-pole down the stream,
In Embassy to his Mother; his Body's hostage
For his return.

My ingenuous Instrument,
(Hark Polidore) it sounds: but what occasion
Has Cadwal now to give it motion? Hark.

Is he at home?


He went hence even now.


What does he mean?
Since death of my deer'st Mother
It did not speak before. All solemn things
Should answer solemn Accidents. The matter?
Triumphs for nothing, and lamenting Toys,
Is iollity for Apes, and grief for Boys.
Is Cadwall mad?

Look, here he comes,
And brings the dire occasion in his Arms,
Of what we blame him for.

The Bird is dead
That we have made so much on. I had rather
Have skipt from sixteen years of Age, to sixty:
To have turned my leaping time into a Crutch,
Then have seen this.

Oh sweetest, fairest Lilly:
My Brother wears thee not the one half so well,
As when thou grew'st thy self.

Oh Melancholy,
Who ever yet could sound thy bottom? Find
The Ooze, to show what Coast thy sluggish care
Might easilest harbor in. Thou blessed thing,
Jove knows what man thou might have made: but I,
Thou dyed'st a most rare Boy, of Melancholy.
How found you him?

Stark, as you see:
Thus smiling, as some Fly had tickled slumber,
Not as deaths dart being laughed at: his right Cheek
Reposing on a Cushion.

Where?


OF the floor:
His arms thus leagued, I thought he slept, and put
My clowted Brogues from off my feet, whose rudeness
Answered my steps too loud.

Why, he but sleeps:
If he be gone, he will make his Grave, a Bed:
With female Fayries will his Tomb be haunted,
And Worms will not come to thee.

With fairest Flowers
Whilst Summer lasts, and I live here, Fidele,
I Will sweeten thy sad grave: thou shall not lack
The Flower that is like thy face. Pale-Primrose, nor
The azur'd Hare-bell, like thy Veins: no, nor
The leaf of Eglantine, whom not to slander,
Out-sweetned not thy breath: the Raddocke would
With Charitable bill (Oh bill sore shaming
Those rich-left-heyres, that let their Fathers lie
Without a Monument) bring thee all this,
Yea, and furred Moss besides. When Flowers are none
To winter-ground thy Coarse --

Prithee have done*
And do not play in Wench-like words with that
Which is so serious. Let us bury him,
And not protract with admiration, what
Is now due debt. To' the grave.

Say, where shall's lay him?


By good Euriphile, our Mother.


Be It so:
And let us (Polidore) though now our voices
Have got the mannish crack, sing him to' the ground
As once to our Mother: use like note, and words,
Save that Euriphile, must be Fidele.

Cadwall,
I cannot sing: I Will weep, and word it with thee;
For Notes of sorrow, out of tune, are worse
Then Priests, and Phanes that lie.

We Will speak it then.


Great greefes I see medicine the less: For Cloten
Is quite forgot. He was a Queens Son, Boys,
And though he came our Enemy remember
He was paid for that: though mean, and mighty rotting
Together have one dust, yet Reverence
(That Angel of the world) does make distinction
Of place 'tweene high, and low. Our Foe was Princely,
And though you took his life, as being our Foe,
Yet bury him, as a Prince.

Pray you fetch him hither,
Thersites body is as good as Ajax,
When neither are alive.

If you will go fetch him,
We Will say our Song the whilst: Brother begin.

Nay Cadwall, we must lay his head to' the East,
My Father has a reason for 't.

It Is true.


Come on then, and remove him.


So, begin.


Fear no more the heat of the Sun,
Nor the furious Winters rages,
Thou thy worldly task have don,
Home art gone, and taken thy wages.
Golden Lads, and Girls all must,
As Chimney-Sweepers come to dust.

Fear no more the frown of the Great,
Thou art past the Tirants stroke,
Care no more to cloth and eat,
To thee the Reed is as the Oak:
The Scepter, Learning, Physic must,
All follow this and come to dust.

Fear no more the Lightning flash.


Nor the all-dreaded Thunderstone.


Fear not Slander, Censure rash.


Thou have finished Joy and m^ne.


All Lovers young, all Lovers must,
Consigne to thee and come to dust.

No Exorcis^r harm thee,


Nor no witchcraft charm thee.


Ghost vnlaid forbear thee.


Nothing ill come near thee.


Quiet consumation have,
And renowned be thy grave.

We have done our obsequies:
Come lay him down.

Here Is a few Flowers, but 'bout midnight more:
The herbs that have on them cold dew of the night
Are strewings fir'st for Graves: upon their Faces.
You were as Flowers, now withered: even so
These Herbelets shall, which we upon you strew.
Come on, away, apart upon our knees:
The ground that gave them first, has them again:
Their pleasures here are past, so are their pain.
Yes Sir, to Milford-Hauen, which is the way?
I thank you: by yond bush? pray how far thither?
'Ods pittikins: can it be six mile yet?
I have gone all night: 'Faith, I Will lie down, and sleep.
But soft; no Bedfellow? Oh Gods, and Goddesses!
These Flowers are like the pleasures of the World;
This bloody man the care on it. I hope I dream:
For so I thought I was a Caue-keeper,
And Cook to honest Creatures. But it is not so:
'Twas but a bolt of nothing, shot at nothing,
Which the Brain makes of Fumes. Our very eyes,
Are sometimes like our Judgments, blind. Good faith
I tremble still with fear: but if there be
Yet left in Heaven, as small a drop of pity
As a Wrens eye; feared Gods, a part of it.
The Dreame's here still: even when I wake it is
Without me, as within me: not imagined, felt.
A headless man? The Garments of Posthumus?
I know the shape of 's Leg: this is his Hand:
His Foot Mercuriall: his martial Thigh
The brawnes of Hercules: but his Iouiall face --
Murder in heaven? How? it is gone. Pisanio,
All Curses madded Hecuba gave the Greeks,
All mine to boot, be darted on thee: thou
Conspired with that Irregulous devil Cloten,
Has here cut off my Lord. To write, and read,
Be henceforth treacherous. Damned Pisanio,
Has with his forged Letters (damned Pisanio)
From this most brauest vessel of the world
Struck the maine top! Oh Posthumus, alas,
Where is thy head? where is that? Aye me! where is that?
Pisanio might have killed thee at the heart,
And left this head on. How should this be, Pisanio?
It Is he, and Cloten: Malice, and Lucre in them
Have laid this Woe here. Oh it is pregnant, pregnant!
The Drugge he gave me, which he said was precious
And Cordial to me, have I not found it
Murderous to' the Senses? That confirms it home:
This is Pisanio's deed, and Cloten: Oh!
Give color to my pale cheek with thy blood,
That we the horrider may seem to those
Which chance to find us. Oh, my Lord! my Lord!

To them, the Legions garrisoned in Gallia
After your will, have crossed the Sea, attending
You here at Milford-Hauen, with your Ships:
They are here in readiness.

But what from Rome?


The Senate has stirred up the Confiners,
And Gentlemen of Italy, most willing Spirits,
That promise Noble Service: and they come
Under the Conduct of bold Iachimo,
Syenna's Brother.

When expect you them?


With the next benefit of the wind.


This forwardness
Makes our hopes fair. Command our present numbers
Be mustered: bid the Captains look to it. Now Sir,
What have you dreamed of late of this wars purpose.

Last night, the very Gods showed me a vision
(I fast, and prayed for their Intelligence) thus:
I saw Jove's Bird, the Roman Eagle winged
From the spungy South, to this part of the West,
There vanished in the Sunbeams, which portends
(Unless my sins abuse my Divination)
Success to the Roman host.

Dream often so,
And never false. Soft hoa, what truncke is here?
Without his top? The ruin speaks, that sometime
It was a worthy building. How? a Page?
Or dead, or sleeping on him? But dead rather:
For Nature does abhor to make his bed
With the defunct, or sleep upon the dead.
Let Us see the Boys face.

He Is alive my Lord.


He Will then instruct us of this body: Young one,
Inform us of thy Fortunes, for it seems
They crave to be demanded: who is this
Thou make thy bloody Pillow? Or who was he
That (otherwise then noble Nature did)
Has altered that good Picture? What Is thy interest
In this sad wrack? How came't? Who is it?
What art thou?

I am nothing; or if not,
Nothing to be were better: This was my Master,
A very valiant Britain, and a good,
That here by Mountaineers lies slain: Alas,
There is no more such Masters: I may wander
From East to Occident, cry out for Service,
Try many, all good: serve truly: never
Find such another Master.

'Lacke, good youth:
Thou mou'st no less with thy complaining, then
Thy Master in bleeding: say his name, good Friend.

Richard du Champ: If I do lie, and do
No harm by it, though the Gods hear, I hope
They Will pardon it. Say you Sir?

Thy name?


Fidele Sir.


Thou doo'st approve thy self the very same:
Thy Name well sits thy Faith; thy Faith, thy Name:
Wilt take thy chance with me? I will not say
Thou shall be so well mastered, but be sure
No less beloved. The Roman Emperors Letters
Sent by a Consul to me, should not sooner
Then thine own worth prefer thee: Go with me.

I Will follow Sir. But first, and 't please the Gods,
I Will hide my Master from the Flies, as deep
As these poor Pickaxes can dig: and when
With wild wood-leaues and weeds, I have strewn his grave
And on it said a Century of prayers
(Such as I can) twice over, I Will weep, and sighe,
And leaving so his service, follow you,
So please you entertain me.

I good youth,
And rather Father thee, then Master thee: My Friends,
The Boy has taught us manly duties: Let us
Find out the prettiest Dazied-Plot we can,
And make him with our Pikes and Partisans
A Grave: Come, Athie him: Boy he is preferred
By thee, to us, and he shall be interred
As Soldiers can. Be cheerful; wipe thine eyes,
Some Falls are means the happier to arise.

Again: and bring me word how it is with her,
A Feauour with the absence of her Son;
A madness, of which her life's in danger: Heavens,
How deeply you at once do touch me. Imogen,
The great part of my comfort, gone: My Queen
Upon a desperate bed, and in a time
When fearful Wars point at me: Her Son gone,
So needful for this present? It strikes me, past
The hope of comfort. But for thee, Fellow,
Who needs must know of her departure, and
Do seem so ignorant, we will enforce it from thee
By a sharp Torture.

Sir, my life is yours,
I humbly set it at your will: But for my Mistress,
I nothing know where she remains: why gone,
Nor when she purposes return. Beseech your Highness,
Hold me your loyal Servant.

Good my Liege,
The day that she was missing, he was here;
I dare be bound he is true, and shall perform
All parts of his subjection loyally. For Cloten,
There wants no diligence in seeking him,
And will no doubt be found.

The time is troublesome:
We Will slip you for a season, but our jealousy
Does yet depend.

So please your Majesty,
The Roman Legions, all from Gallia drawn,
Are landed on your Coast, with a supply
Of Roman Gentlemen, by the Senate sent.

Now for the Counsel of my Son and Queen,
I am amazed with matter.

Good my Liege,
Your preparation can affront no less
Then what you hear of. Come more, for more you're ready:
The want is, but to put those Powers in motion,
That long to move.

I thank you: let us withdraw
And meet the Time, as it seeks us. We fear not
What can from Italy annoy us, but
We grieve at chances here. Away.

I heard no Letter from my Master, since
I wrote him Imogen was slain. It Is strange:
Nor hear I from my Mistress, who did promise
To yield me often tidings. Neither know I
What is betide to Cloten, but remain
Perplexed in all. The Heavens still must work:
Wherein I am false, I am honest: not true, to be true.
These present wars shall find I love my Country,
Even to the note of the King, or I Will fall in them:
All other doubts, by time let them be cleared,
Fortune brings in some Boats, that are not steered.

The noise is round about us.


Let us from it.


What pleasure Sir, we find in life, to lock it
From Action, and Adventure.

Nay, what hope
Have we in hiding us? This way the Romans
Must, or for Britains slay us or receive us
For barbarous and unnatural Reuolts
During their use, and slay us after.

Sons,
We Will higher to the Mountains, there secure v*
To the Kings party there is no going: newness
Of Clotens death (we being not known, not mustered
Among the Bands) may drive us to a render
Where we have lived; and so extort from's that
Which we have done, whose answer would be death
Drawn on with Torture.

This is (Sir) a doubt
In such a time, nothing becoming you,
Nor satisfying us.

It is not likely,
That when they hear their Roman horses neigh,
Behold their quartered Fires; have both their eyes
And ears so cloyed importantly as now,
That they will waste their time upon our note,
To know from whence we are.

Oh, I am known
Of many in the Army: Many years
(Though Cloten then but young) you see, not wore him
From my remembrance. And besides, the King
Has not deserved my Service, nor your Loves,
Who find in my Exile, the want of Breeding;
The certainty of this heard life, aye hopeless
To have the courtesy your Cradle promised,
But to be still hot Summers Tanlings, and
The shrinking Slaves of Winter.

Then be so,
Better to cease to be. Pray Sir, to' the Army:
I, and my Brother are not known; your self
So out of thought, and thereto so ore-growne,
Cannot be questioned.

By this Sun that shines
I Will thither: What thing is it, that I never
Did see man dye, scarce ever looked on blood,
But that of Coward Hares, hot Goats, and Venison?
Never bestrid a Horse save one, that had
A Rider like my self, who never wore Rowell,
Nor Iron on his heel? I am ashamed
To look upon the holy Sun, to have
The benefit of his blessed Beams, remaining
So long a poor unknown.

By heavens I Will go,
If you will bless me Sir, and give me leave,
I Will take the better care: but if you will not,
The hazard therefore due fall on me, by
The hands of Romans.

So say I, Amen.


No reason I (since of your lives you set
So slight a valewation) should reserve
My cracked one to more care. Have with you Boys:
If in your Country wars you chance to dye,
That is my Bed too (Lads) and there I Will lie.
Lead, lead; the time seems long, their blood thinks scorn
Till it fly out, and show them Princes borne.

Yea bloody cloth. I Will keep thee: for I am wished
Thou should be colored thus. You married ones,
If each of you should take this course, how many
Must murder Wives much better then themselves
For wrying but a little? Oh Pisanio,
Every good Servant does not all Commands:
No Bond, but to do just ones. Gods, if you
Should have 'tane vengeance on my faults, I never
Had lived to put on this: so had you saved
The noble Imogen, to repent, and struck
Me (wretch) more worth your Vengeance. But alack,
You snatch some hence for little faults; that is love
To have them fall no more: you some permit
To second illes with illes, each elder worse,
And make them dread it, to the dooers thrift.
But Imogen is your own, do your best wills,
And make me blessed to obey. I am brought hither
Among the Italian Gentry, and to fight
Against my Ladies Kingdom: It Is enough
That (Britain) I have killed thy Mistress: Peace,
I Will give no wound to thee: therefore good Heavens,
Hear patiently my purpose. I Will disrobe me
Of these Italian weeds, and suite my self
As does a Britain Pezant: so I Will fight
Against the part I come with: so I Will dye
For thee (O Imogen) even for whom my life
Is every breath, a death: and thus, unknown,
Pitied, nor hated, to the face of peril
My self I Will dedicate. Let me make men know
More valor in me, then my habits show.
Gods, put the strength of the Leonati in me:
To shame the guize of the world, I will begin,
The fashion less without, and more within.

The heaviness and guilt within my bosom,
Takes off my manhood: I have belyed a Lady,
The Princess of this Country; and the air on it
Reuengingly enfeebles me, or could this Carle,
A very drudge of Natures, have subdu'de me
In my profession? Knighthoods, and Honors borne
As I wear mine) are titles but of scorn.
If that thy Gentry (Britain) go before
This Lowt, as he exceeds our Lords, the odds
Is, that we scarce are men, and you are Gods.

Stand, stand, we have the advantage of the ground,
The Lane is guarded: Nothing rowts us, but
The villainy of our fears.

Stand, stand, and fight.


Away boy from the Troops, and save thy self:
For friends kill friends, and the disorder's such
As war were hood-winked.

It Is their fresh supplies.


It is a day turned strangely: or betimes
Let Us reinforce, or fly.

Came thou from where they made the stand?


I did,
Though you it seems come from the Fliers?

I did.


No blame be to you Sir, for all was lost,
But that the Heavens fought: the King himself
Of his wings destitute, the Army broken,
And but the backs of Britains seen; all flying
Through a strait Lane, the Enemy full-hearted,
Lolling the Tongue with slaught'ring: having work
More plentiful, then Tools to do it: struck down
Some mortally, some slightly touched, some falling
Merely through fear, that the strait pass was damm'd
With deadmen, hurt behind, and Cowards living
To dye with lengthened shame.

Where was this Lane?


Close by the battle, ditch'd, and walled with turph,
Which gave advantage to an ancient Soldiour
(An honest one I warrant) who deserved
So long a breeding, as his white beard came to,
In doing this for's Country. Athwart the Lane,
He, with two striplings (Lads more like to run
The Country base, then to commit such slaughter,
With faces fit for Maskes, or rather fayrer
Then those for preservation cased, or shame)
Made good the passage, cried to those that fled.
Our Britains hearts dye flying, not our men,
To darkness fleet souls that fly backwards; stand,
Or we are Romans, and will give you that
Like beasts, which you shun beastly, and may save
But to look back in frown: Stand, stand. These three,
Three thousand confident, in act as many:
For three performers are the File, when all
The rest do nothing. With this word stand, stand,
Accomodated by the Place; more Charming
With their own Nobleness, which could have turned
A Distaffe, to a Lance, gilded pale looks;
Part shame, part spirit renewed, that some turned coward
But by example (Oh a sin in War,
Damned in the first beginners) began to look
The way that they did, and to grin like Lions
Upon the Pikes of the Hunters. Then began
A stop in the Chaser; a Retire: Anon
A Rowt, confusion thick: forthwith they fly
Chickens, the way which they stopped Eagles: Slaves
The strides the Victors made: and now our Cowards
Like Fragments in hard Voyages became
The life of the need: having found the back door open
Of the unguarded hearts: heavens, how they wound,
Some slain before some dying; some their Friends
Ore-borne in the former wave, ten chased by one,
Are now each one the slaughter-man of twenty:
Those that would dye, or ere resist, are grown
The mortal bugs of the Field.

This was strange chance:
A narrow Lane, an old man, and two Boys.

Nay, do not wonder at it: you are made
Rather to wonder at the things you hear,
Then to work any. Will you Rhyme upon 't,
And vent it for a Mock'rie? Here is one:
"Two Boys, an Oldman (twice a Boy) a Lane,
"Preserved the Britains, was the Romans bane.

Nay, be not angry Sir.


Lack, to what end?
Who dares not stand his Foe, I Will be his Friend:
For if he will do, as he is made to do,
I know he will quickly fly my friendship too.
You have put me into Rhyme.

Farewell, you're angry.


Still going? This is a Lord: Oh Noble misery
To be in the Field, and ask what news of me:
To day, how many would have given their Honors
To have saved their Carcasses? Took heel to do it,
And yet dyed too. I, in mine own woe charmed
Could not find death, where I did hear him groan,
Nor feel him where he struck. Being an ugly Monster,
It Is strange he hides him in fresh Cups, soft Beds,
Sweet words; or has more ministers then we
That draw his knives in the War. Well I will find him:
For being now a Favorer to the Britain,
No more a Britain, I have resumed again
The part I came in. Fight I will no more,
But yield me to the veriest Hind, that shall
Once touch my shoulder. Great the slaughter is
Here made by' the Roman; great the Answer be
Britains must take. For me; my Ransome's death,
On either side I come to spend my breath;
Which neither here I Will keep, nor bear again,
But end it by some means for Imogen.

Great Jupiter be praised, Lucius is taken,
It Is thought the old man, and his sons, were Angels.

There was a fourth man, in a silly habit,
That gave the Affront with them.

So it is reported:
But none of 'em can be found. Stand, who is there?

A Roman,
Who had not now been drooping here, if Seconds
Had answered him.

Lay hands on him: a Dog,
A leg of Rome shall not return to tell
What Crows have peckt them here: he brags his service
As if he were of note: bring him to' the King.

You shall not now be stolen,
You have locks upon you:
So graze, as you find Pasture.

I, or a stomach.


Most welcome bondage; for thou art a way
(I think) to liberty: yet am I better
Then one that is sick of the Gowt, since he had rather
Groan so in perpetuity, then be cured
By 'th 'sure Physician, Death; who is the key
T'vnbarre these Locks. My Conscience, thou art fettered
More then my shanks, and wrists: you good Gods give me
The penitent Instrument to pick that Bolt,
Then free for ever. Is It enough I am sorry?
So Children temporal Fathers do appease;
Gods are more full of mercy. Must I repent,
I cannot do it better then in Gyues,
Desired, more then constrained, to satisfy
If of my Freedom it is the maine part, take
No stricter render of me, then my All.
I know you are more clement then vilde men,
Who of their broken Debtors take a third,
A sixth, a tenth, letting them thrive again
On their abatement; that is not my desire.
For Imogens dear life, take mine, and though
It Is not so dear, yet it is a life; you coined it,
'Tweene man, and man, they weigh not every stamp:
Though light, take Pieces for the figures sake,
(You rather) mine being yours: and so great Powers,
If you will take this Audit, take this life,
And cancel these cold Bonds. Oh Imogen,
I Will speak to thee in silence.

No more thou Thunder-Master show thy spite* on Mortal Flies:
With Mars fall out with Juno chide, that thy Adulteries Rates, and Reuenges.
Has my poor Boy done ought but well, whose face I never saw:
I died whilst in the Womb he staide, attending Natures Law.
Whose Father then (as men report, thou Orphans Father art)
Thou should have bin, and sheelded him, from this earth-vexing smart.

Lucina lent not me her aid, but took me in my Throws,
That from me was Posthumus ripped, came crying amongst his Foes.
A thing of pity.

Great Nature like his Ancestrie, molded the stuff so fair:
That head served the praise of the World, as great Sicilius heir.

When once he was mature for man, in Britain where was he
That could stand up his parallel?
Or fruitful object be?
In eye of Imogen, that b^st could deem his dignity.

With Marriage wherefore was he mocked to be exiled, and thrown
From Leonati Seat, and cast from her, his dearest one:
Sweet Imogen?

Why did you suffer Iachimo, slight thing of Italy,
To taint his Nobler heart and brain, with needless ielousy,
And to become the geeke and scorn of the others vilany?

For this, from stiller Seats we came, our Parents, and us twain,
That striking in our Countries cause, fell bravely, and were slain,
Our Fealty, and Tenantius right, with Honor to maintain.

Like hardiment Posthumus has to Cymbeline performed:
Then Jupiter, you King of Gods, why have you thus adiourn'd
The Graces for his Merits due, being all to dolors turned?

Thy Crystal window open; look, look out, no longer exercise
Upon a valiant Race, thy harsh, and potent injuries:

Since (Jupiter) our Son is good, take off his miseries.


Peep through thy Marble Mansion, help, or we poor Ghosts will cry
To' the shining Synod of the rest, against thy Deity.

Help (Jupiter) or we appeal, and from thy justice fly.


No more you petty Spirits of Region low
Offend our hearing: hush. How dare you Ghostes
Accuse the Thunderer, whose Bolt (you know)
Sky-planted, batters all rebelling Coasts.
Poor shadows of Elysium, hence, and rest
Upon your neuer-withering banks of Flowers.
Be not with mortal accidents oppressed,
No care of yours it is, you know it is ours.
Whom best I love, I cross; to make my gift
The more delayed, delighted. Be content,
Your low-laide Son, our Godhead will vplift:
His Comforts thrive, his Trials well are spent:
Our Iouiall Star reigned at his Birth, and in
Our Temple was he married: Rise, and fade,
He shall be Lord of Lady Imogen,
And happier much by his Affliction made.
This Tablet lay upon his Breast, wherein
Our pleasure, his full Fortune, does confine,
And so away: no farther with your dinne
Express Impatience, least you stir up mine:
Mount Eagle, to my Palace Christalline.

He came in Thunder, his Celestial breath
Was sulphurous to smell: the holy Eagle
Stooped, as to foot us: his Ascension is
More sweet then our blessed Fields: his Royal Bird
Prunes the immortal wing, and cloyes his Beak,
As when his God is pleased.

Thanks Jupiter.


The Marble Pauement clozes, he is entered
His radiant Roof: Away, and to be blessed
Let us with care perform his great behest.

Sleep, thou have bin a Grandsire, and begot
A Father to me: and thou have created
A Mother, and two Brothers. But (oh scorn)
Gone, they went hence so soon as they were borne:
And so I am awake. Poor Wretches, that depend
On Greatness, Favor; Dream as I have done,
Wake, and find nothing. But (alas) I swerue:
Many Dream not to find, neither deserve,
And yet are steeped in Favors; so am I
That have this Golden chance, and know not why:
What Fayeries haunt this ground? A Book? Oh rare one,
Be not, as is our fangled world, a Garment
Nobler then that it couers. Let thy effects
So follow, to be most unlike our Courtiers,
As good, as promise.
WHen as a Lions whelpe, shall to himself unknown, without seeking find, and
be embraced by a piece of tender Air: And when from a stately Cedar shall be
lopt branches, which being dead many years, shall after revive, be ioynted to
the old Stock, and freshly grow, then shall Posthumus end his miseries,
Britain be fortunate, and flourish in Peace and Plenty

It Is still a Dream: or else such stuff as Madmen
Tongue, and brain not: either both, or nothing,
Or senseless speaking, or a speaking such
As sense cannot untie. Be what it is,
The Action of my life is like it, which I Will keep
If but for simpathy.

Come Sir, are you ready for death?


Ouer-roasted rather: ready long ago.


Hanging is the word, Sir, if you be ready for that, you are well Cooked.


So if I prove a good repast to the Spectators, the dish pays the shot.


A heavy reckoning for you Sir: But the comfort is you shall be called to no
more payments, fear no more Tavern Bills, which are often the sadness of
parting, as the procuring of mirth: you come in faint for want of meat, depart
reeling with too much drink: sorry that you have paid too much, and sorry
that you are paid too much: Purse and Brain, both empty: the Brain the
heavier, for being too light; the Purse too light, being drawn of heaviness.
Oh, of this contradiction you shall now be quit: Oh the charity of a penny
Cord, it sums up thousands in a trice: you have no true Debtor, and Creditor
but it: of what is past, is, and to come, the discharge: your neck (Sis) is
Pen, Book, and Counters; so the Acquittance follows


I am merrier to dye, then thou art to live.


Indeed Sir, he that sleeps, feels not the Toothache: but a man that were to
sleep your sleep, and a Hangman to help him to bed, I think he would change
places with his Officer: for, look you Sir, you know not which way you shall go


Yes indeed do I, fellow.


Your death has eyes in's head then: I have not seen him so pictured: you must
either be directed by some that take upon them to know, or to take upon your
self that which I am sure you do not know: ^or iump the after-enquiry on your
own peril: and how you shall speed in your iournies end, I think you will never
return to tell one


I tell thee, Fellow, there are none want eyes, to direct them the way I am
going, but such as wink, and will not use them


What an infinite mock is this, that a man should have the best use of eyes, to
see the way of blindness: I am sure hanging's the way of winking


Knock off his Manacles, bring your Prisoner to the King.


Thou bring'st good news, I am called to be made free.


I Will be hanged then.


Thou shall be then freer then a Jailer; no bolt, for the dead.


Unless a man would marry a Gallows, and beget young Gibbets, I never saw one
so prone: yet on my Conscience, there are verier Knaves desire to live, for all
he be a Roman; and there be some of them too that dye against their wills; so
should I, if I were one. I would we were all of one mind, and one mind good:
O there were desolation of Gaolers and Galowses: I speak against my present
profit, but my wish has a preferment in it


Stand by my side you, whom the Gods have made
Preseruers of my Throne: woe is my heart,
That the poor Soldier that so richly fought,
Whose rags, shamed gilded Arms, whose naked breast
Stept^ before Ta^ges of proof, cannot be found:
He shall be happy that can find him, if
Our Grace can make him so.

I never saw
Such Noble fury in so poor a Thing;
Such precious deeds, in one that promised naught
But beggary, and poor looks.

No tidings of him?


He has bin searched among the dead, and living;
But no trace of him.

To my grief, I am
The heir of his Reward, which I will add
To you (the Liver, Heart, and Brain of Britain)
By whom (I grant) she lives. It Is now the time
To ask of whence you are. Report it.

Sir,
In Cambria are we borne, and Gentlemen:
Further to boast, were neither true, nor modest,
Unless I add, we are honest.

Bow your knees:
Arise my Knights of the Battle, I create you
Companions to our person, and will fit you
With Dignities becoming your estates.
There Is business in these faces: why so sadly
Greet you our Victory? you look like Romans,
And not of the Court of Britain.

Hayle great King,
To sour your happiness, I must report
The Queen is dead.

Who worse then a Physician
Would this report become? But I consider,
By Medicine life may be prolonged, yet death
Will seize the Doctor too. How ended she?

With horror, madly dying, like her life,
Which (being cruel to the world) concluded
Most cruel to her self. What she confessed,
I will report, so please you. These her Women
Can trip me, if I err, who with wet cheeks
Were present when she finished.

Prithee say.


First, she confessed she never loved you: only
Affected Greatness got by you: not you:
Married your Royalty, was wife to your place:
Abhorred your person.

She alone knew this:
And but she spoke it dying, I would not
Believe her lips in opening it. Proceed.

Your daughter, whom she bore in hand to love
With such integrity, she did confess
Was as a Scorpion to her sight, whose life
(But that her flight prevented it) she had
Taken off by poison.

O most delicate Fiend!
Who is it can read a Woman? Is there more?

More Sir, and worse. She did confess she had
For you a mortal Mineral, which being took,
Should by the minute feed on life, and lingering,
By inches waste you. In which time, she purposed
By watching, weeping, tendance, kissing, to
Overcome you with her show; and in time
(When she had fitted you with her craft, to work
Her Son into the adoption of the Crown:
But failing of her end by his strange absence,
Grew shameless desperate, opened (in despite
Of Heaven and Men) her purposes: repented
The evils she hatched, were not effected: so
Dispayring, dyed.

Heard you all this, her Women?


We did, so please your Highness.


Mine eyes
Were not in fault, for she was beautiful:
Mine ears that hear her flattery, nor my heart,
That thought her like her seeming. It had been vicious
To have mistrusted her: yet (Oh my Daughter)
That it was folly in me, thou may say,
And prove it in thy feeling. Heaven mend all.
Thou comm'st not Caius now for Tribute, that
The Britains have rac'd out, though with the loss
Of many a bold one: whose Kinsmen have made suite
That their good souls may be appeased, with slaughter
Of you their Captives, which our self have granted,
So think of your estate.

Consider Sir, the chance of War, the day
Was yours by accident: had it gone with us,
We should not when the blood was cool, have threatend
Our Prisoners with the Sword. But since the Gods
Will have it thus, that nothing but our lives
May be called ransom, let it come: Suffices,
A Roman, with a Romans heart can suffer:
Augustus lives to think on it: and so much
For my peculiar care. This one thing only
I will entreat, my Boy (a Britain borne)
Let him be ransomed: Never Master had
A Page so kind, so duteous, diligent,
So tender over his occasions, true,
So feate, so Nurse-like: let his virtue join
With my request, which I Will make bold your Highness
Cannot deny: he has done no Britain harm,
Though he have served a Roman. Save him (Sir)
And spare no blood beside.

I have surely seen him:
His favor is familiar to me: Boy,
Thou have looked thy self into my grace,
And art mine own. I know not why, wherefore,
To say, live boy: never thank thy Master, live;
And ask of Cymbeline what Boon thou will,
Fitting my bounty, and thy state, I Will give it:
Yea, though thou do demand a Prisoner
The Noblest taken.

I humbly thank your Highness.


I do not bid thee beg my life, good Lad,
And ye^ I know thou will.

No, no, alack,
There Is other work in hand: I see a thing
Bitter to me, as death: your life, good Master,
Must shuffle for it self.

The Boy disdaines me,
He leaves me, scorns me: briefly dye their joys,
That place them on the truth of Gyrles, and Boys.
Why stands he so perplexed?

What would thou Boy?
I love thee more, and more: think more and more
What Is best to ask. Know him thou look on? speak
Wilt have him live? Is he thy Kin? thy Friend?

He is a Roman, no more kin to me,
Then I to your Highness, who being born your vassaile
Am something nearer.

Wherefore ey'st him so?


I Will tell you (Sir) in private, if you please
To give me hearing.

I, with all my heart,
And lend my best attention. What Is thy name?

Fidele Sir.


You Are my good youth: my Page
I Will be thy Master: walk with me: speak freely.

Is not this Boy revived from death?


One Sand another
Not more resembles that sweet Rosy Lad:
Who dyed, and was Fidele: what think you?

The same dead thing alive.


Peace, peace, see further: he eyes us not, forbear
Creatures may be alike: were 't he, I am sure
He would have spoke to us.

But we see him dead.


Be silent: let us see further.


It is my Mistress:
Since she is living, let the time run on,
To good, or bad.

Come, stand thou by our side,
Make thy demand alowd. Sir, step you forth,
Give answer to this Boy, and do it freely,
Or by our Greatness, and the grace of it
(Which is our Honor) bitter torture shall
Winnow the truth from falsehood. One speak to him.

My boon is, that this Gentleman may render
Of whom he had this Ring.

What Is that to him?


That Diamond upon your Finger, say
How came it yours?

Thou Wilt torture me to leave unspoken, that
Which to be spoke, would torture thee.

How? me?


I am glad to be constrained to utter that
Which torments me to conceal. By Villainy
I got this Ring; 'twas Leonatus Jewel,
Whom thou did banish: and which more may grieve thee,
As it does me: a Nobler Sir, never lived
'Twixt sky and ground. Will thou hear more my Lord?

All that belongs to this.


That Paragon, thy daughter,
For whom my heart drops blood, and my false spirits
Quail to remember. Give me leave, I faint.

My Daughter? what of her? Renew thy strength
I had rather thou should live, while Nature will,
Then dye ere I hear more: strive man, and speak.

Upon a time, unhappy was the clock
That struck the hour: it was in Rome, accursed
The Mansion where: 'twas at a Feast, oh would
Our Viands had bin poisoned (or at least
Those which I heau'd to head:) the good Posthumus,
(What should I say? he was too good to be
Where ill men were, and was the best of all
Among'st the rar'st of good ones) sitting sadly,
Hearing us praise our Loves of Italy
For Beauty, that made barren the swelled boast
Of him that best could speak: for Feature, laming
The Shrine of Venus, or straight-pight Minerua,
Postures, beyond brief Nature. For Condition,
A shop of all the qualities, that man
Loves woman for, besides that hook of Wiuing,
Fairness, which strikes the eye.

I stand on fire. Come to the matter.


All too soon I shall,
Unless thou would grieve quickly. This Posthumus,
Most like a Noble Lord, in love, and one
That had a Royal Lover, took his hint,
And (not dispraising whom we praised, therein
He was as calm as virtue) he began
His Mistress picture, which, by his tongue, being made,
And then a mind put in it, either our bragges
Were crak'd of Kitchin-Trulles, or his description
Proved us vnspeaking sottes.

Nay, nay, to' the purpose.


Your daughters Chastity, (there it begins)
He spoke of her, as Dian had hot dreams,
And she alone, were cold: Whereat, I wretch
Made scruple of his praise, and wager'd with him
Pieces of Gold, against this, which then he wore
Upon his honored finger) to attain
In suite the place of's bed, and win this Ring
By hers, and mine Adultery: he (true Knight)
No lesser of her Honor confident
Then I did truly find her, stakes this Ring,
And would so, had it been a Carbuncle
Of Phoebus Wheel; and might so safely, had it
Bin all the worth of's Carre. Away to Britain
Post I in this design: Well may you (Sir)
Remember me at Court, where I was taught
Of your chaste Daughter, the wide difference
'Twixt Amorous, and Villainous. Being thus quenched
Of hope, not longing; mine Italian brain,
Began in your duller Britain operare
Most vildely: for my vantage excellent.
And to be brief, my practice so preuayl'd
That I returned with simular proof enough,
To make the Noble Leonatus mad,
By wounding his belief in her Renown,
With Tokens thus, and thus: auerring notes
Of Chamber-hanging, Pictures, this her Bracelet
(Oh cunning how I got) nay some marks
Of secret on her person, that he could not
But think her bond of Chastity quite cracked,
I having 'tane the forfeyt. Whereupon,
Me thinks I see him now.

I so thou do,
Italian Fiend. Aye me, most credulous Fool,
Egregious murderer, Thief, any thing
That Is due to all the Villains past, in being
To come. Oh give me Cord, or knife, or poison,
Some upright Iusticer. Thou King, send out
For Torturors ingenious: it is I
That all the abhorred things of the earth amend
By being worse then they. I am Posthumus,
That killed thy Daughter: Villain-like, I lie,
That caused a lesser villain then my self,
A sacrilegious Thief to do it. The Temple
Of Virtue was she; yea, and she her self.
Spit, and throw stones, cast mire upon me, set
The dogs of the street to bay me: every villain
Be called Posthumus Leonatus, and
Be villainy less then 'twas. Oh Imogen!
My Queen, my life, my wife: oh Imogen,
Imogen, Imogen.

Peace my Lord, hear, hear.


Shall's have a play of this?
Thou scornful Page, there lie thy part.

Oh Gentlemen, help,
Mine' and your Mistress: Oh my Lord Posthumus,
You never killed Imogen till now: help, help,
Mine honored Lady.

Does the world go round?


How comes these staggers on me?


Wake my Mistress.


If this be so, the Gods do mean to strike me
To death, with mortal joy.

How fares my Mistress?


Oh get thee from my sight,
Thou gave me poison: dangerous Fellow hence,
Breath not where Princes are.

The tune of Imogen.


Lady, the Gods throw stones of sulpher on me, if
That box I gave you, was not thought by me
A precious thing, I had it from the Queen.

New matter still.


It poisoned me.


Oh Gods!
I left out one thing which the Queen confessed,
Which must approve thee honest. If Pasanio
Have (said she) given his Mistress that Confection
Which I gave him for Cordial, she is served,
As I would serve a Rat.

What Is this, Cornelius?


The Queen (Sir) very often importuned me
To temper poisons for her, still pretending
The satisfaction of her knowledge, only
In killing Creatures vilde, as Cats and Dogs
Of no esteem. I dreading, that her purpose
Was of more danger, did compound for her
A certain stuff, which being taken, would cease
The present power of life, but in short time,
All Offices of Nature, should again
Do their due Functions. Have you taken of it?

Most like I did, for I was dead.


My Boys, there was our error.


This is sure Fidele.


Why did you throw your wedded Lady fro you?
Think that you are upon a Rock, and now
Throw me again.

Hang there like fruit, my soul,
Till the Tree dye.

How now, my Flesh? my Child?
What, make thou me a dullard in this Act?
Will thou not speak to me?

Your blessing, Sir.


Though you did love this youth, I blame ye not,
You had a motive for it.

My tears that fall
Prove holy water on thee; Imogen,
Thy Mothers dead.

I am sorry for it, my Lord.


Oh, she was naught; and long of her it was
That we meet here so strangely: but her Son
Is gone, we know not how, nor where.

My Lord,
Now fear is from me, I Will speak troth. Lord Cloten
Upon my Ladies missing, came to me
With his Sword drawn, foamed at the mouth, and swore
If I discovered not which way she was gone,
It was my instant death. By accident,
I had a feigned Letter of my Masters
Then in my pocket, which directed him
To seek her on the Mountains near to Milford,
Where in a frenzy, in my Masters Garments
(Which he enforced from me) away he posts
With unchaste purpose, and with oath to violate
My Ladies honor, what became of him,
I further know not.

Let me end the Story: I slew him there.


Marry, the Gods forefend.
I would not thy good deeds, should from my lips
Pluck a hard sentence: Prithee valiant youth
Deny't again.

I have spoke it, and I did it.


He was a Prince.


A most inciuill one. The wrongs he did me
Were nothing Prince-like; for he did provoke me
With Language that would make me spurn the Sea,
If it could so roar to me. I cut off's head,
And am right glad he is not standing here
To tell this tale of mine.

I am sorrow for thee:
By thine own tongue thou art condemned, and must
Endure our Law: You Are dead.

That headless man I thought had bin my Lord


Bind the Offender,
And take him from our presence.

Stay, Sir King.
This man is better then the man he slew,
As well descended as thy self, and has
More of thee merited, then a Band of Clotens
Had ever scarre for. Let his Arms alone,
They were not borne for bondage.

Why old Soldier:
Will thou undo the worth thou art unpaid for
By tasting of our wrath? How of descent
As good as we?

In that he spoke too far.


And thou shall dye for it.


We will dye all three,
But I will prove that two one's are as good
As I have given out him. My Sons, I must
For mine own part, unfold a dangerous speech,
Though happily well for you.

Your danger's ours.


And our good his.


Have at it then, by leave
Thou hadd'st (great King) a Subject, who
Was called Belarius.

What of him? He is a banished Traitor.


He it is, that has
Assumed this age: indeed a banished man,
I know not how, a Traitor.

Take him hence,
The whole world shall not save him.

Not too hot;
First pay me for the Nursing of thy Sons,
And let it be confiscate all, so soon
As I have receyu'd it.

Nursing of my Sons?


I am too blunt, and saucy: here is my knee:
Ere I arise, I will prefer my Sons,
Then spare not the old Father. Mighty Sir,
These two young Gentlemen that call me Father,
And think they are my Sons, are none of mine,
They are the issue of your Loins, my Liege,
And blood of your begetting.

How? my Issue.


So sure as you, your Fathers: I (old Morgan)
Am that Belarius, whom you sometime banished:
Your pleasure was my near offense, my punishment
It self, and all my Treason that I suffered,
Was all the harm I did. These gentle Princes
(For such, and so they are) these twenty years
Have I trained up; those Arts they have, as I
Could put into them. My breeding was (Sir)
As your Highness knows: Their Nurse Euriphile
(Whom for the Theft I wedded) stole these Children
Upon my Banishment: I moved her to it,
Having receyu'd the punishment before
For that which I did then. Beaten for Loyalty,
Excited me to Treason. Their dear loss,
The more of you 'twas felt, the more it shaped
Unto my end of stealing them. But gracious Sir,
Here are your Sons again, and I must loose
Two of the sweet'st Companions in the World.
The benediction of these covering Heavens
Fall on their heads liks dew, for they are worthy
To in-lay Heaven with Stars.

Thou weep'st, and speak:
The Service that you three have done, is more
Unlike, then this thou tell. I lost my Children,
If these be they, I know not how to wish
A pair of worthier Sons.

Be pleased awhile;
This Gentleman, whom I call Polidore,
Most worthy Prince, as yours, is true Guiderius:
This Gentleman, my Cadwall, Aruiragus.
Your younger Princely Son, he Sir, was lapt
In a most curious Mantle, wrought by the hand
Of his Queen Mother, which for more probation
I can with ease produce.

Guiderius had
Upon his neck a Mole, a sanguine Star,
It was a mark of wonder.

This is he,
Who has upon him still that natural stamp:
It was wise Natures end, in the donation
To be his evidence now.

Oh, what am I
A Mother to the birth of three? Nere Mother
Reioyc'd deliverance more: Blessed, pray you be,
That after this strange starting from your Orbs,
You may reign in them now: Oh Imogen,
Thou have lost by this a Kingdom.

No, my Lord:
I have got two Worlds by it. Oh my gentle Brothers,
Have we thus met? Oh never say hereafter
But I am truest speaker. You called me Brother
When I was but your Sister: I you Brothers,
When we were so indeed.

Did you ere meet?


I my good Lord.


And at first meeting loved,
Continew'd so, until we thought he dyed.

By the Queens Dram she swallowed.


O rare instinct!
When shall I hear all through? This fierce abridgment,
Has to it Circumstantiall branches, which
Distinction should be rich in. Where? how lived you?
And when came you to serve our Roman Captive?
How parted with your Brother? How first met them?
Why fled you from the Court? And whether these?
And your three motives to the Battle? with
I know not how much more should be demanded,
And all the other by-dependances
From chance to chance? But nor the Time, nor Place
Will serve our long Interrogatories. See,
Posthumus Anchors upon Imogen;
And she (like harmless Lightning) throws her eye
On him: her Brothers, Me: her Master hitting
Each object with a Joy: the Counter-change
Is severally in all. Let Us quit this ground,
And smoke the Temple with our Sacrifices.
Thou art my Brother, so we will hold thee ever.

You are my Father too, and did relieve me:
To see this gracious season.

All ore-ioy'd
Save these in bonds, let them be joyful too,
For they shall taste our Comfort.

My good Master, I will yet do you service.


Happy be you.


The forlorn Soldier, that no Nobly fought
He would have well becom'd this place, and graced
The thankings of a King.

I am Sir
The Soldier that did company these three
In poor beseeming: 'twas a fitment for
The purpose I then followed. That I was he,
Speak Iachimo, I had you down, and might
Have made you finish.

I am down again:
But now my heavy Conscience sinkes my knee,
As then your force did. Take that life, beseech you
Which I so often owe: but your Ring first,
And here the Bracelet of the truest Princess
That ever swore her Faith.

Kneel not to me:
The power that I have on you, is to spare you:
The malice toward you, to forgive you. Live
And deal with others better.

Nobly doomed:
We Will learn our Freeness of a Sonne-in-Law:
Pardon's the word to all.

You help us Sir,
As you did mean indeed to be our Brother,
Joyed are we, that you are.

Your Servant Princes* Good my Lord of Rome
Call forth your Sooth-sayer: As I slept, me thought
Great Jupiter upon his Eagle backed
Appeared to me, with other sprightly shows
Of mine own Kindred. When I waked, I found
This Labell on my bosom; whose containing
Is so from sense in hardness, that I can
Make no Collection of it. Let him show
His skill in the construction.

Philarmonus.


Here, my good Lord.


Read, and declare the meaning.
WHen as a Lions whelpe, shall to himself unknown, without seeking find, and
be embraced by a piece of tender Air: And when from a stately Cedar shall be
lopt branches, which being dead many years, shall after revive, be ioynted to
the old Stock, and freshly grow, then shall Posthumus end his miseries,
Britain be fortunate, and flourish in Peace and Plenty

Thou Leonatus art the Lions Whelpe,
The fit and apt Construction of thy name
Being Leonatus, does import so much:
The piece of tender Air, thy virtuous Daughter,
Which we call Mollis Aer, and Mollis Aer
We term it Mulier; which Mulier I divine
Is this most constant Wife, who even now
Answering the Letter of the Oracle,
Unknown to you unsought, were clipped about
With this most tender Air.

This has some seeming.


The lofty Cedar, Royal Cymbeline
Personates thee: And thy lopt Branches, point
Thy two Sons forth: who by Belarius stolen
For many years thought dead, are now revived
To the Maiesticke Cedar joined; whose Issue
Promises Britain, Peace and Plenty.

Well,
My Peace we will begin: And Caius Lucius,
Although the Victor, we submit to Caesar,
And to the Roman Empire; promising
To pay our wonted Tribute, from the which
We were dissuaded by our wicked Queen,
Whom heavens in Justice both on her, and hers,
Have laid most heavy hand.

The fingers of the Powers above, do tune
The harmony of this Peace: the Vision
Which I made known to Lucius ere the stroke
Of yet this scarse-cold-Battaile, at this instant
Is full accomplished. For the Roman Eagle
From South to West, on wing soaring aloft
Lessened her self, and in the Beams of the Sun
So vanished; which fore-shew'd our Princely Eagle
The Imperial Caesar, should again unite
His Favor, with the Radiant Cymbeline,
Which shines here in the West.

Laud we the Gods,
And let our crooked Smoakes climb to their Nostrils
From our blessed Altars. Publish we this Peace
To all our Subjects. Set we forward: Let
A Roman, and a British Ensign wave
Friendly together: so through Luds-Towne march,
And in the Temple of great Jupiter
Our Peace we will ratify: Seal it with Feasts.
Set on there: Never was a War did cease
(Ere bloody hands were washed) with such a Peace.


