Who Is there?


Nay answer me: Stand and unfold your self.


Long live the King.


Barnardo?


He.


You come most carefully upon your hour.


It Is now struck twelve, get thee to bed Francisco.


For this relief much thanks: It Is bitter cold,
And I am sick at heart.

Have you had quiet Guard?


Not a Mouse stirring.


Well, goodnight. If you do meet Horatio and Marcellus, the Riuals of my Watch,
bid them make have


I think I hear them. Stand: who is there?


Friends to this ground.


And Leige-men to the Dane.


Give you good night.


O farwell honest Soldier, who has relieved you?


Barnardo has my place: give you goodnight.


Holla Barnardo.


Say, what is Horatio there?


A piece of him.


Welcome Horatio, welcome good Marcellus.


What, has this thing appeared again to night.


I have seen nothing.


Horatio says, it is but our Fantasy,
And will not let belief take hold of him
Touching this dreaded sight, twice seen of us,
Therefore I have entreated him along
With us, to watch the minutes of this Night,
That if again this Apparition come,
He may approve our eyes, and speak to it.

Tush, tush, 'twill not appear.


Sit down awhile,
And let us once again assail your ears,
That are so fortified against our Story,
What we two Nights have seen.

Well, sit we down,
And let us hear Barnardo speak of this.

Last night of all,
When yond same Star that is Westward from the Pole
Had made his course to illume that part of Heaven
Where now it burns, Marcellus and my self,
The Bell then beating one.

Peace, break thee of:
Look where it comes again.

In the same figure, like the King that is dead.


Thou art a Scholar; speak to it Horatio.


Looks it not like the King? Mark it Horatio.


Most like: It harrowes me with fear and wonder


It would be spoke too.


Question it Horatio.


What art thou that vsurp'st this time of night,
Together with that Fair and Warlike form
In which the Majesty of buried Denmark
Did sometimes march: By Heaven I charge thee speak.

It is offended.


See, it stalks away.


Stay: speak; speak: I Charge thee, speak.


It Is gone, and will not answer.


How now Horatio? You tremble and look pale:
Is not this something more then Fantasy?
What think you on it?

Before my God, I might not this believe
Without the sensible and true avouch
Of mine own eyes.

Is it not like the King?


As thou art to thy self,
Such was the very Armor he had on,
When the Ambitious Norwey combatted:
So frowned he once, when in an angry parle
He smot the sledded Pollax on the Ice.
It Is strange.

Thus twice before, and just at this dead hour,
With Martial stalk, has he gone by our Watch.

In what particular thought to work, I know not:
But in the gross and scope of my Opinion,
This boades some strange erruption to our State.

Good now sit down, and tell me he that knows
Why this same strict and most obseruant Watch,
So nightly toils the subject of the Land,
And why such daily Cast of Brazon Cannon
And Foreign Mart for Implements of war:
Why such impresse of Ship-wrights, whose sore Task
Does not divide the Sunday from the week,
What might be toward, that this sweaty have
Does make the Night ioynt-Labourer with the day:
Who is it that can inform me?

That can I,
At least the whisper goes so: Our last King,
Whose Image even but now appeared to us,
Was (as you know) by Fortinbras of Norway,
(Thereto pricked on by a most emulate Pride)
Dared to the Combat. In which, our Valiant Hamlet,
(For so this side of our known world esteemed him)
Did slay this Fortinbras: who by a Sealed Compact,
Well ratified by Law, and Heraldrie,
Did forfeite (with his life) all those his Lands
Which he stood seized on, to the Conqueror:
Against the which, a Moity competent
Was gaged by our King: which had returned
To the Inheritance of Fortinbras,
Had he bin Vanquisher, as by the same Cou'nant
And carriage of the Article design,
His fell to Hamlet. Now sir, young Fortinbras,
Of vnimproued Mettle, hot and full,
Has in the skirts of Norway, here and there,
Shark'd up a List of Landlesse Resolutes,
For Food and Diet, to some Enterprise
That has a stomach in it: which is no other
(And it does well appear unto our State)
But to recover of us by strong hand
And terms Compulsatiue, those foresaid Lands
So by his Father lost: and this (I take it)
Is the maine Motive of our Preparations,
The Sourse of this our Watch, and the chief head
Of this post-hast, and Romage in the Land.
But soft, behold: Lo, where it comes again:
I Will cross it, though it blast me. Stay Illusion:
If thou have any sound, or use of Voice,
Speak to me. If there be any good thing to be done,
That may to thee do ease, and grace to me; speak to me.
If thou art privy to thy Countries Fate
(Which happily foreknowing may avoid) Oh speak.
Or, if thou have vp-hoorded in thy life
Extorted Treasure in the womb of Earth,
(For which, they say, you Spirits often walk in death)
Speak of it. Stay, and speak. Stop it Marcellus.

Shall I strike at ir with my Partizan?


Do, if it will not stand.


It Is here.


It Is here.


It Is gone.
We do it wrong, being so Maiesticall
To offer it the show of Violence,
For it is as the Air, invulnerable,
And our vain blows, malicious Mockery.

It was about to speak, when the Cock crew.


And then it started, like a guilty thing
Upon a fearful Summons. I have heard,
The Cock that is the Trumpet to the day,
Does with his lofty and shrill-sounding Throat
Awake the God of Day: and at his warning,
Whether in Sea, or Fire, in Earth, or Air,
The extrauagant, and erring Spirit, hyes
To his Confine. And of the truth herein,
This present Object made probation.

It faded on the crowing of the Cock.
Some says, that ever against that Season comes
Wherein our Saviors Birth is celebrated,
The Bird of Dawning sings all night long:
And then (they say) no Spirit can walk abroad,
The nights are wholesome, then no Planets strike,
No Faiery talks, nor Witch has power to Charm:
So hallowed, and so gracious is the time.

So have I heard, and do in part believe it.
But look, the Morn in Russet mantle clad,
Walks over the dew of you high Eastern Hill,
Break we our Watch up, and by my advice
Let us impart what we have seen to night
Unto young Hamlet. For upon my life,
This Spirit dumb to us, will speak to him:
Do you consent we shall acquaint him with it,
As needful in our Loves, fitting our Duty?

Let do it I pray, and I this morning know
Where we shall find him most conveniently.

Though yet of Hamlet our dear Brothers death
The memory be green: and that it us befitted
To bear our hearts in grief, and our whole Kingdom
To be contracted in one brow of woe:
Yet so far has Discretion fought with Nature,
That we with wisest sorrow think on him,
Together with remembrance of our selves.
Therefore our sometimes Sister, now our Queen,
The Imperial Ioyntresse of this warlike State,
Have we, as 'twere, with a defeated joy,
With one Auspicious, and one Dropping eye,
With mirth in Funeral, and with Dirge in Marriage,
In equal Scale weighing Delight and Dole
Taken to Wife; nor have we herein barred
Your better Wisdoms, which have freely gone
With this affair along, for all our Thanks.
Now follows, that you know young Fortinbras,
Holding a weak supposall of our worth;
Or thinking by our late dear Brothers death,
Our State to be disioynt, and out of Frame,
Colleagued with the dream of his Advantage;
He has not fayl'd to pester us with Message,
Importing the surrender of those Lands
Lost by his Father: with all Bonds of Law
To our most valiant Brother. So much for him.
Now for our self, and for this time of meeting
Thus much the business is. We have here writ
To Norway, Uncle of young Fortinbras,
Who Impotent and Bedrid, scarsely hears
Of this his Nephews purpose, to suppress
His further gate herein. In that the Leuies,
The Lists, and full proportions are all made
Out of his subject: and we here dispatch
You good Cornelius, and you Voltemand,
For bearing of this greeting to old Norway,
Giving to you no further personal power
To business with the King, more then the scope
Of these dilated Articles allow:
Farewell and let your have commend your duty.

In that, and all things, will we show our duty.


We doubt it nothing, heartily farewell.
And now Laertes, what is the news with you?
You told us of some suite. What is it Laertes?
You cannot speak of Reason to the Dane,
And loose your voice. What would thou beg Laertes,
That shall not be my Offer, not thy Asking?
The Head is not more Native to the Heart,
The Hand more Isntrumental to the Mouth,
Then is the Throne of Denmark to thy Father.
What would thou have Laertes?

Dread my Lord,
Your leave and favor to return to France*
From whence, though willingly I came to Denmark
To show my duty in your Coronation,
Yet now I must confess, that duty done,
My thoughts and wishes bend again toward France,
And bow them to your gracious leave and pardon.

Have you your Fathers leave?
What says Pollonius?

He has my Lord:
I do beseech you give him leave to go.

Take thy fair hour Laertes, time be thine,
And thy best graces spend it at thy will:
But now my Cousin Hamlet, and my Son?

A little more then kin, and less then kind.


How is it that the Clouds still hang on you?


Not so my Lord, I am too much in the Sun.


Good Hamlet cast thy nightly color off,
And let thine eye look like a Friend on Denmark.
Do not for ever with thy veyled lids
Seek for thy Noble Father in the dust;
Thou know it is common, all that lives must dye,
Passing through Nature, to Eternity.

I Madam, it is common.


If it be;
Why seems it so particular with thee.

Seems Madam? Nay, it is: I know not Seems:
It Is not alone my Inky Cloak (good Mother)
Nor Custo^mary suites of solemn Black,
Nor windy suspiration of forced breath,
No, nor the fruitful River in the Eye,
Nor the dejected hauiour of the Visage,
Together with all Forms, Moods, shows of Grief,
That can denote me truly. These indeed Seem,
For they are actions that a man might play:
But I have that Within, which passes show;
These, but the Trappings, and the Suites of woe.

It Is sweet and commendable
In your Nature Hamlet,
To give these mourning duties to your Father:
But you must know, your Father lost a Father,
That Father lost, lost his, and the Suruiuer bound
In filial Obligation, for some term
To do obsequious Sorrow. But to persevere
In obstinate Condolement, is a course
Of impious stubbornness. It Is unmanly grief,
It shows a will most incorrect to Heaven,
A Heart unfortified, a Mind impatient,
An Understanding simple, and vnschool'd:
For, what we know must be, and is as common
As any the most vulgar thing to sense,
Why should we in our peevish Opposition
Take it to heart? Fie, it is a fault to Heaven,
A fault against the Dead, a fault to Nature,
To Reason most absurd, whose common Theme
Is death of Fathers, and who still has cried,
From the first Coarse, till he that dyed to day,
This must be so. We pray you throw to earth
This vnpreuayling woe, and think of us
As of a Father; For let the world take note,
You are the most immediate to our Throne,
And with no less Nobility of Love,
Then that which dearest Father bears his Son,
Do I impart toward you. For your intent
In going back to School in Wittenberg.
It is most retrograde to our desire:
And we beseech you, bend you to remain
Here in the cheer and comfort of our eye,
Our cheifest Courtier Cousin, and our Son.

Let not thy Mother lose her Prayers Hamlet:
I prithee stay with us, go not to Wittenberg.

I shall in all my best
Obey you Madam.

Why it is a loving, and a fair Reply,
Be as our self in Denmark. Madam come,
This gentle and vnforc'd accord of Hamlet
Sits smiling to my heart; in grace whereof,
No iocond health that Denmark drinks to day,
But the great Cannon to the Clouds shall tell,
And the Kings Rouce, the Heavens shall brute again,
Respeaking earthly Thunder. Come away.

Oh that this too too solid Flesh, would melt,
Thaw, and resolve it self into a Dew:
Or that the Everlasting had not fixed
His Cannon against Selfe-slaughter. O God, O God!
How weary, stale, flat, and unprofitable
Seems to me all the uses of this world?
Fie on it? Oh fie, fie, it is an vnweeded Garden
That grows to Seed: Things rank, and gross in Nature
Possess it merely. That it should come to this:
But two months dead: Nay, not so much; not two,
So excellent a King, that was to this
Hiperion to a Satyr: so loving to my Mother,
That he might not beteene the winds of heaven
Visit her face too roughly. Heaven and Earth
Must I remember: why she would hang on him,
As if increase of Appetite had grown
By what it fed on; and yet within a month?
Let me not think on it: Frailty, thy name is woman.
A little Month, or ere those shoes were old,
With which she followed my poor Fathers body
Like Niobe, all tears. Why she, even she.
(O Heaven! A beast that wants discourse of Reason
Would have mourned longer) married with mine Uncle,
My Fathers Brother: but no more like my Father,
Then I to Hercules. Within a Month?
Ere yet the salt of most unrighteous Tears
Had left the flushing of her gauled eyes,
She married. O most wicked speed, to post
With such dexterity to Incestuous sheets:
It is not, nor it cannot come to good.
But break my heart, for I must hold my tongue.

Hail to your Lordship.


I am glad to see you well:
Horatio, or I do forget my self.

The same my Lord,
And your poor Servant ever.

Sir my good friend,
I Will change that name with you:
And what make you from Wittenberg Horatio?

My good Lord.


I am very glad to see you: good even Sir.
But what in faith make you from Wittemberge?

A truant disposition, good my Lord.


I would not have your Enemy say so;
Nor shall you do mine ear that violence,
To make it truster of your own report
Against your self. I know you are no Truant:
But what is your affair in Elsenour?
We Will teach you to drink deep, ere you depart.

My Lord, I came to see your Fathers Funeral.


I pray thee do not mock me (fellow Student)
I think it was to see my Mothers-Wedding.

Indeed my Lord, it followed hard upon.


Thrift, thrift Horatio: the Funeral Bakt-meats
Did coldly furnish forth the Marriage Tables;
Would I had met my dearest foe in heaven,
Ere I had ever seen that day Horatio.
My father, me thinks I see my father.

Oh where my Lord?


In my minds eye (Horatio)


I saw him once; he was a goodly King.


He was a man, take him for all in all:
I shall not look upon his like again.

My Lord, I think I saw him yesternight.


Saw? Who?


My Lord, the King your Father.


The King my Father?


Season your admiration for a while
With an attent ear; till I may deliver
Upon the witness of these Gentlemen,
This marvel to you.

For Heavens love let me hear.


Two nights together, had these Gentlemen
( Marcellus and Barnardo) on their Watch
In the dead wast and middle of the night
Been thus encountered. A figure like your Father,
Armed at all points exactly, Cap a Pe,
Appears before them, and with sollemne march
Goes slow and stately: By them thrice he walked,
By their oppressed and feare-surprized eyes,
Within his Truncheons length; whilst they bestil'd
Almost to Ielly with the Act of fear,
Stand dumb and speak not to him. This to me
In dreadful secrecy impart they did,
And I with them the third Night kept the Watch,
Whereas they had delivered both in time,
Form of the thing; each word made true and good,
The Apparition comes. I knew your Father:
These hands are not more like.

But where was this?


My Lord upon the platform where we watched.


Did you not speak to it?


My Lord, I did;
But answer made it none: yet once me thought
It lifted up it head, and did address
It self to motion, like as it would speak:
But even then, the Morning Cock crew loud;
And at the sound it shrunk in have away,
And vanished from our sight.

It Is very strange.


As I do live my honored Lord it is true
And we did think it writ down in our duty
To let you know of it.

Indeed, indeed Sirs; but this troubles me.
Hold you the watch to Night*

We do my Lord.


Armed, say you?


Armed, my Lord.


From top to toe?


My Lord, from head to foot.


Then saw you not his face?


O yes, my Lord, he wore his Beauer up.


What, looked he frowningly?


A countenance more in sorrow then in anger.


Pale, or red?


Nay very pale.


And fixed his eyes upon you?


Most constantly.


I would I had been there.


It would have much amazed you.


Very like, very like: staid it long?


While one with moderate have might tell a hundred.


Longer, longer.


Not when I saw't.


His Beard was grisly? no.


It was, as I have seen it in his life,
A Sable Siluer'd.

I Will watch to Night; perchance 'twill wake again.


I warrant you it will.


If it assume my noble Fathers person,
I Will speak to it, though Hell it self should gape
And bid me hold my peace. I pray you all,
If you have hitherto conceald this sight;
Let it be treble in your silence still:
And whatsoever else shall hap to night,
Give it an understanding but no tongue;
I will requite your loves; so, fare ye well:
Upon the Platform twixt eleven and twelve,
I Will visit you.

Our duty to your Honor.


Your love, as mine to you: farewell.
My Fathers Spirit in Arms? All is not well:
I doubt some foul play: would the Night were come;
Till then sit still my soul; foul deeds will rise,
Though all the earth orewhelm them to men's eyes.

My necessaries are imbark't; Farewell:
And Sister, as the Winds give Benefit,
And Conuoy is assistant; do not sleep,
But let me hear from you.

Do you doubt that?


For Hamlet, and the trifling of his favors,
Hold it a fashion and a toy in Blood;
A Violet in the youth of Primy Nature;
Froward, not permanent; sweet not lasting
The suppliance of a minute? No more.

No more but so.


Think it no more:
For nature cressant does not grow alone,
In thewes and Bulk: but as his Temple waxes,
The inward service of the Mind and Soul
Grows wide withal. Perhaps he loves you now,
And now no soil nor cautell does besmerch
The virtue of his fear: but you must fear
His greatness weighed, his will is not his own;
For he himself is subject to his Birth:
He may not, as vnuallued persons do,
Carue for himself; for, on his choice depends
The sanctity and health of the weole State.
And therefore must his choice be circumscribed
Unto the voice and yielding of that Body,
Whereof he is the Head. Then if he says he loves you,
It fits your wisdom so far to believe it;
As he in his peculiar Sect and force
May give his saying deed: which is no further,
Then the maine voice of Denmark goes withal.
Then weigh what loss your Honor may sustain,
If with too credent ear you list his Songs;
Or lose your Heart; or your chaste Treasure open
To his vnmastred importunity.
Fear it Ophelia, fear it my dear Sister,
And keep within the rear of your Affection;
Out of the shot and danger of Desire.
The chariest Maid is Prodigal enough,
If she unmask her beauty to the Moon:
Virtue it self scapes not calumnious strokes,
The Canker Galls, the Infants of the Spring
Too often before the buttons be disclosed,
And in the Morn and liquid dew of Youth,
Contagious blastments are most imminent.
Be wary then, best safety lies in fear;
Youth to it self rebels, though none else near.

I shall the effect of this good Lesson keep,
As watchmen to my heart: but good my Brother
Do not as some ungracious Pastors do,
Show me the steep and thorny way to Heaven;
Whilst like a puffed and recklesse Libertine
Himself, the Primrose path of dalliance treads,
And reaks not his own read.

Oh, fear me not.
I stay too long; but here my Father comes:
A double blessing is a double grace;
Occasion smiles upon a second leave.

Yet here Laertes? Aboard, aboard for shame,
The wind sits in the shoulder of your sail,
And you are staid for there: my blessing with you;
And these few Precepts in thy memory,
See thou Character. Give thy thoughts no tongue,
Nor any vnproportion'd thought his Act:
Be thou familiar; but by no means vulgar:
The friends thou have, and their adoption tried,
Grapple them to thy Soul, with hoopes of Steel:
But do not dull thy palm, with entertainment
Of each vnhatch't, vnfledg'd Comrade. Beware
Of entrance to a quarrel: but being in
Bear't that the opposed may beware of thee.
Give every man thine ear; but few thy voice:
Take each man's censure; but reserve thy judgment:
Costly thy habit as thy purse can buy;
But not expressed in fancy; rich, not gawdies
For the Apparel often proclaims the man.
And they in France of the best rank and station,
Are of a most select and generous cheff in that.
Neither a borrower, nor a lender be;
For lone, often loses both it self and friend:
And borrowing duls the edge of Husbandry.
This above all; to thine own self be true:
And it must follow, as the Night* the Day,
Thou can not then be false to any man.
Farewell: my Blessing season this in thee.

Most humbly do I take my leave, my Lord.


The time inuites you, go, your servants tend.


Farewell Ophelia, and remember well
What I have said to you.

It Is in my memory locked,
And you your self shall keep the key of it.

Farewell.


What is it Ophelia he has said to you?


So please you, something touching the L. Hamlet.


Marry, well bethought:
It Is told me he has very often of late
Given private time to you; and you your self
Have of your audience been most free and bounteous.
If it be so, as so it is put on me;
And that in way of caution: I must tell you,
You do not understand your self so clearly,
As it behoues my Daughter, and your Honor.
What is between you, give me up the truth?

He has my Lord of late, made many tenders
Of his affection to me.

Affection, puh. You speak like a green Girl,
Vnsifted in such perilous Circumstance.
Do you believe his tenders, as you call them?

I do not know, my Lord, what I should think.


Marry I Will teach you; think your self a Baby,
That you have taken his tenders for true pay,
Which are not starling. Tender your self more dearly;
Or not to crack the wind of the poor Phrase,
Roaming it thus, you will tender me a fool.

My Lord, he has importuned me with love,
In honorable fashion.

I, fashion you may call it, go too, go too.


And has given countenance to his speech,
My Lord, with all the vows of Heaven.

I, Springes to catch Woodcocks. I do know
When the Blood burns, how Prodigal the Soul
Gives the tongue vows: these blazes, Daughter,
Giving more light then heat; extinct in both,
Even in their promise, as it is a making;
You must not take for fire. For this time Daughter,
Be somewhat scanter of your Maiden presence;
Set your entreatments at a higher rate,
Then a command to parley. For Lord Hamlet,
Believe so much in him, that he is young,
And with a larger tether may he walk,
Then may be given you. In few, Ophelia,
Do not believe his vows; for they are Broakers,
Not of the eye, which their Inuestments show:
But mere implorators of unholy Suits,
Breathing like sanctified and pious bonds,
The better to beguile. This is for all:
I would not, in plain terms, from this time forth,
Have you so slander any moment leisure,
As to give words or talk with the Lord Hamlet:
Look to it, I charge you; come your ways.

I shall obey my Lord.


The Air bites shrewdly: is it very cold?


It is a nipping and an eager air.


What hour now?


I think it lacks of twelve.


No, it is struck.


Indeed I heard it not: then it draws near the season,
Wherein the Spirit held his wont to walk.
What does this mean my Lord?

The King does wake to night, and takes his rouse,
Keeps wassels and the swaggering vpspring reeles,
And as he dreines his draughts of Renish down,
The kettle Drum and Trumpet thus bray out
The triumph of his Pledge.

Is it a custom?


I marry is it;
And to my mind, though I am native here,
And to the manner borne: It is a Custom
More honored in the breach, then the observance.

Look my Lord, it comes.


Angels and Ministers of Grace defend us:
Be thou a Spirit of health, or Goblin damned,
Bring with thee airs from Heaven, or blasts from Hell,
Be thy events wicked or charitable,
Thou come in such a questionable shape
That I will speak to thee. I Will call thee Hamlet,
King, Father, Royal Dane: Oh, oh, answer me,
Let me not burst in Ignorance; but tell
Why thy Canonized bones Hearsed in death,
Have burst their cerments, why the Sepulcher
Wherein we saw thee quietly enurn'd*
Has opened his ponderous and Marble jaws,
To cast thee up again? What may this mean?
That thou dead Coarse again in complete steel,
Reuisits thus the glimpses of the Moon,
Making Night hidious? And we fools of Nature,
So horridly to shake our disposition,
With thoughts beyond thee; reaches of our Souls,
Say, why is this? wherefore? what should we do?

It beckons you to go away with it,
As if it some impartment did desire
To you alone.

Look with what courteous action
It wafts you to a more removed ground:
But do not go with it.

No, by no means.

It will not speak: then will I follow it.

Do not my Lord.


Why, what should be the fear?
I do not set my life at a pins fee;
And for my Soul, what can it do to that?
Being a thing immortal as it self:
It waves me forth again; I Will follow it.

What if it tempt you toward the Flood my Lord?
Or to the dreadful Sonnet of the Cliffe,
That beetles over his base into the Sea,
And there assumes some other horrible form,
Which might deprive your Sovereignty of Reason,
And draw you into madness think of it?

It wafts me still: go on, I Will follow thee.


You shall not go my Lord.


Hold off your band.


Be ruled, you shall not go.


My fate cries out,
And makes each petty Artire in this body,
As hardy as the Nemian Lions nerve:
Still am I called? Vnhand me Gentlemen:
By Heaven, I Will make a Ghost of him that lets me:
I say away, go on, I Will follow thee.

He waxes desperate with imagination.


Let Us follow; it is not fit thus to obey him.


Have after, to what issue will this come?


Something is rotten in the State of Denmark.


Heaven will direct it.


Nay, let us follow him.


Where will thou lead me? speak; I Will go no further.


Mark me.


I will.


My hour is almost come,
When I to sulphurous and tormenting Flames
Must render up my self.

Alas poor Ghost.


Pity me not, but lend thy serious hearing
To what I shall unfold.

Speak, I am bound to hear.


So art thou to revenge, when thou shall hear.


What?


I am thy Fathers Spirit,
Doomed for a certain term to walk the night;
And for the day confined to fast in Fires,
Till the foul crimes done in my days of Nature
Are burnt and purged away? But that I am forbid
To tell the secrets of my Prisonhouse;
I could a Tale unfold, whose lightest word
Would harrow up thy soul; freeze thy young blood,
Make thy two eyes like Stars, start from their Spheres,
Thy knotty and combined locks to part,
And each particular hair to stand an end,
Like Quilles upon the fretfull Porpentine:
But this eternal blason must not be
To ears of flesh and blood; lift Hamlet, oh lift,
If thou did ever thy dear Father love.

Oh Heaven!


Revenge his foul and most unnatural Murder.


Murder?


Murder most foul, as in the best it is;
But this most foul strange, and unnatural.

Have, have me to know it,
That with wings as swift
As meditation, or the thoughts of Love,
May sweep to my Revenge.

I find thee apt,
And duller should thou be then the fat weed
That rots it self in ease, on Lethe Wharfe,
Would thou not stir in this. Now Hamlet hear:
It Is given out, that sleeping in mine Orchard,
A Serpent stung me: so the whole ear of Denmark,
Is by a forged process of my death
Rankly abused: But know thou Noble youth,
The Serpent that did sting thy Fathers life,
Now wears his Crown.

O my Propheticke soul: mine Uncle?


I that incestuous, that adulterate Beast
With witchcraft of his wits, has Traitorous gifts.
Oh wicked Wit, and Gifts, that have the power
So to seduce? Won to to this shameful Lust
The will of my most seeming virtuous Queen:
Oh Hamlet, what a falling off was there,
From me, whose love was of that dignity,
That it went hand in hand; even with the Vow
I made to her in Marriage; and to decline
Upon a wretch, whose Natural gifts were poor
To those of mine, But Virtue, as it never will be moved,
Though Lewdness court it in a shape of Heaven:
So Lust, though to a radiant Angel linked,
Will sat it self in a Celestiallbed, and prey on Garbage.
But soft, me thinks I sent the Mornings Air;
Brief let me be: Sleeping within mine Orchard,
My custom always in the afternoon;
Upon my secure hour thy Uncle stole
With juice of cursed Hebenon in a Violl,
And in the Porches of mine ears did pour
The leaperous Distilment; whose effect
Holds such an enmity with blood of Man,
That swift as Quicksilver, it courses through
The natural Gates and Allies of the Body;
And with a sudden vigor it does posset
And curd, like Aygre droppings into Milk,
The thin and wholesome blood: so did it mine;
And a most instant Tetter baked about.
Most Lazar-like, with vile and loathsome crust,
All my smooth Body.
Thus was I, sleeping, by a Brothers hand,
Of Life, of Crown, and Queen at once dispatched;
Cut off even in the Blossoms of my Sin,
Vnhouzzled, disappointed, vnnaneld,
No reckoning made, but sent to my account
With all my imperfections on my head;
Oh horrible, Oh horrible, most horrible:
If thou have nature in thee bear it not;
Let not the Royal Bed of Denmark be
A Couch for Luxury and damned Incest.
But howsoever thou pursuest this Act,
Taint not thy mind; nor let thy Soul contriue
Against thy Mother ought; leave her to heaven,
And to those Thorns that in her bosom lodge,
To prick and sting her. Fare thee well at once;
The Glow-worme shows the Matine to be near,
And gins to pale his ineffectual Fire:
Adue, adue, Hamlet: remember me.

Oh all you host of Heaven! Oh Earth; what else?
And shall I couple Hell? Oh fie: hold my heart;
And you my sinnewes, grow not instant Old;
But bear me stiffely up: Remember thee?
I, thou poor Ghost, while memory holds a seat
In this distracted Globe: Remember thee?
Yea, from the Table of my Memory,
I Will wipe away all triuiall fond Records,
All sawes of Books, all forms, all presures past,
That youth and observation coppied there;
And thy Commandment all alone shall live
Within the Book and Volume of my Brain,
Unmixed with baser matter; yes, yes, by Heaven:
Oh most pernicious woman!
Oh Villain, Villain, smiling damned Villain!
My Tables, my Tables; meet it is I set it down,
That one may smile, and smile and be a Villain;
At least I Am sure it may be so in Denmark;
So Uncle there you are: now to my word;
It is; Adue, Adue, Remember me: I have sworn't.

My Lord, my Lord.


Lord Hamlet.


Heaven secure him.


So be it.


Illo, ho, ho, my Lord.


Hillo, ho, ho, boy; come bird, come.


How ist't my Noble Lord?


What news, my Lord?


Oh wonderful!


Good my Lord tell it.


No you will reveal it.


Not I, my Lord, by Heaven.


Nor I, my Lord.


How say you then, would heart of man once think it?
But you will be secret?

I, by Heaven, my Lord.


There Is nere a villain dwelling in all Denmark
But he is an arrant knave.

There needs no Ghost my Lord, come from the Grave, to tell us this.


Why right, you are in the right;
And so, without more circumstance at all,
I hold it-fit that we shake hands, and part:
You, as your business and desires shall point you:
For every man has business and desire,
Such as it is: and for mine own poor part,
Look you, I Will go pray.

These are but wild and hurling words, my Lord.


I Am sorry they offend you heartily:
Yes faith, heartily.

There Is no offense my Lord.


Yes, by Saint Patricke, but there is my Lord,
And much offense too, touching this Vision here:
It is an honest Ghost, that let me tell you:
For your desire to know what is between us,
Over master't as you may. And now good friends,
As you are Friends, Scholars and Soldiers,
Give me one poor request.

What is it my Lord? we will.


Never make known what you have seen to night.


My Lord, we will not.


Nay, but swear't.


Infaith my Lord, not I.


Nor I my Lord: in faith.


Upon my sword.


We have sworn my Lord already.


Indeed, upon my sword, Indeed.


Swear.


Ah ha boy, say thou so. Art thou there true-penny? Come one you here this
fellow in the selleredge Consent to swear


Propose the Oath my Lord.


Never to speak of this that you have seen.
Swear by my sword.

Swear.


Hic and vbique? Then we will shift for grownd,
Come hither Gentlemen,
And lay your hands again upon my sword,
Never to speak of this that you have heard:
Swear by my Sword.

Swear.


Well said old Mole, can work in the ground so fast?
A worthy Pioner, once more remove good friends.

Oh day and night: but this is wondrous strange.


And therefore as a stranger give it welcome.
There are more things in Heaven and Earth, Horatio,
Then are dreamed of in our Philosophy. But come,
Here as before, never so help you mercy,
How strange or odd so ere I bear my self;
(As I perchance hereafter shall think meet
To put an Anticke disposition on:)
That you at such time seeing me, never shall
With Arms encombred thus, or thus, head shake;
Or by pronouncing of some doubtful Phrase;
As well, we know, or we could and if we would,
Or if we list to speak; or there be and if there might,
Or such ambiguous giving out to note,
That you know ought of me; this not to do:
So grace and mercy at your most need help you:
Swear.

Swear.


Rest, rest perturbed Spirit: so Gentlemen,
With all my love I do commend me to you;
And what so poor a man as Hamlet is,
May do to express his love and friending to you,
God willing shall not lack: let us go in together,
And still your fingers on your lips I pray,
The time is out of joint: Oh cursed spite,
That ever I was borne to set it right.
Nay, come let us go together.

Give him his money, and these notes Reynoldo.


I will my Lord.


You shall do maruels wisely: good Reynoldo,
Before you visit him you make inquiry
Of his behavior.

My Lord, I did intend it.


Marry, well said;
Very well said. Look you Sir,
Enquire me first what Danskers are in Paris;
And how, and who; what means; and where they keep:
What company, at what expense: and finding
By this encompassement and drift of question,
That they do know my son: Come you more nearer
Then your particular demands will touch it,
Take you as 'twere some distant knowledge of him,
And thus I know his father and his friends,
And in part him. Do you mark this Reynoldo?

I, very well my Lord.


And in part him, but you may say not well;
But if it be he I mean, he is very wild;
Addicted so and so; and there put on him
What forgeries you please: marry, none so rank,
As may dishonor him; take heed of that:
But Sir, such wanton, wild, and usual slips,
As are Companions noted and most known
To youth and liberty.

As gaming my Lord.


I, or drinking, fencing, swearing,
Quarelling, drabbing. You may go so far.

My Lord that would dishonor him.


Faith no, as you may season it in the charge;
You must not put another scandal on him,
That he is open to Incontinencie;
That Is not my meaning: but breath his faults so quaintly,
That they may seem the taints of liberty;
The flash and out-breake of a fiery mind,
A sauagenes in vnreclaim'd blood of general assault.

But my good Lord.


Wherefore should you do this?


I my Lord, I would know that.


Marry Sir, here is my drift,
And I believe it is a fetch of warrant:
You laying these slight sulleyes on my Son,
As 'twere a thing a little soiled in the working:
Mark you your party in converse; him you would sound,
Having ever seen. In the prenominate crimes,
The youth you breath of guilty, be assured
He closes with you in this consequence:
Good sir, or so, or friend, or Gentleman.
According to the Phrase and the Addition*
Of man and Country.

Very good my Lord.


And then Sir does he this?
He does: what was I about to say?
I was about to say something: where did I leave?

At closes in the consequence:
At friend, or so, and Gentleman.

At closes in the consequence, I marry,
He closes with you thus. I know the Gentleman,
I saw him yesterday, or the other day;
Or then or then, with such and such; and as you say,
There was he gaming, there over took in's Rouse,
There falling out at Tennis; or perchance,
I saw him enter such a house of sail;
Videlicet, a Brothell, or so forth. See you now;
Your bait of falsehood, takes this Cape of truth;
And thus do we of wisdom and of reach
With windlesses, and with assaies of Bias,
By indirections find directions out:
So by my former Lecture and advice
Shall you my Son; you have me, have you not?

My Lord I have.


God buy you; fare you well.


Good my Lord.


Observe his inclination in your self.


I shall my Lord.


And let him plye his Music.


Well, my Lord.


Farewell:
How now Ophelia, what is the matter?

Alas my Lord, I have been so affrighted.


With what, in the name of Heaven?


My Lord, as I was sowing in my Chamber,
Lord Hamlet with his doublet all vnbrac'd,
No hat upon his head, his stockings foul'd,
Vngartred, and down giued to his Anckle,
Pale as his shirt, his knees knocking each other,
And with a look so pitious in purport,
As if he had been loosed out of hell,
To speak of horrors: he comes before me.

Mad for thy Love?


My Lord, I do not know: but truly I do fear it.


What said he?


He took me by the wrist, and held me hard;
Then goes he to the length of all his arm;
And with his other hand thus over his brow,
He falls to such perusal of my face,
As he would draw it. Long staid he so,
At last, a little shaking of mine Arm:
And thrice his head thus wauing up and down;
He raised a sigh, so pittious and profound,
That it did seem to shatter all his bulk,
And end his being. That done, he lets me go,
And with his head over his shoulders turned,
He seemed to find his way without his eyes,
For out adores he went without their help;
And to the last, bended their light on me.

Go with me, I will go seek the King,
This is the very ecstasy of Love,
Whose violent property foredoes it self,
And leads the will to desperate Undertakings,
As often as any passion under Heaven,
That does afflict our Natures. I am sorry,
What have you given him any hard words of late?

No my good Lord: but as you did command,
I did repel his Letters, and deny'de
His access to me.

That has made him mad.
I am sorry that with better speed and judgment
I had not quoted him. I fear he did but trifle,
And meant to wrack thee: but beshrew my jealousy:
It seems it is as proper to our Age,
To cast beyond our selves in our Opinions,
As it is common for the younger sort
To lack discretion. Come, go we to the King,
This must be known, wc being kept close might move
More grief to hide, then hate to utter love.

Welcome dear Rosincrance and Guildensterne.
Moreover, that we much did long to see you,
The need we have to use you, did provoke
Our hasty sending. Something have you heard
Of Hamlets transformation: so I call it,
Since not the exterior, nor the inward man
Resembles that it was. What it should be
More then his Fathers death, that thus has put him
So much from the understanding of himself,
I cannot deem of. I entreat you both,
That being of so young days brought up with him:
And since so Neighbored to his youth, and humor,
That you vouchsafe your rest here in our Court
Some little time: so by your Companies
To draw him on to pleasures, and to gather
So much as from Occasions you may gleane,
That opened lies within our remedy.

Good Gentlemen, he has much talked of you,
And sure I am, two men there are not living,
To whom he more adheres. If it will please you
To show us so much Gentry, and good will,
As to expend your time with us awhile,
For the supply and profit of our Hope,
Your Visitation shall receive such thanks
As fits a Kings remembrance.

Both your Majesty's
Might by the Sovereign power you have of us,
Put your dread pleasures, more into Command
Then to Entreatie.

We both obey,
And here give up our selves, in the full bent,
To lay our Services freely at your feet,
To be commanded.

Thanks Rosincrance, and gentle Guildensterne.


Thanks Guildensterne and gentle Rosincrance.
And I beseech you instantly to visit
My too much changed Son.
Go some of ye,
And bring the Gentlemen where Hamlet is.

Heavens make our presence and our practices
Pleasant and helpful to him.

Amen.


The Ambassadors from Norwey, my good Lord,
Are joyfully returned.

Thou still have bin the Father of good News.


Have I, my Lord? Assure you, my good Liege,
I hold my duty, as I hold my Soul,
Both to my God, one to my gracious King:
And I do think, or else this brain of mine
Hunts not the traile of Policy, so sure
As I have used to do: that I have found
The very cause of Hamlets Lunacie.

Oh speak of that, that I do long to hear.


Give first admittance to the Ambassadors,
My News shall be the News to that great Feast.

Thy self do grace to them, and bring them in.
He tells me my sweet Queen, that he has found
The head and sourse of all your Sons distemper.

I doubt it is no other, but the maine,
His Fathers death, and our o're-hasty Marriage.

Well, we shall sift him. Welcome good Friends:
Say Voltumand, what from our Brother Norwey?

Most fair return of Greetings, and Desires.
Upon our first, he sent out to suppress
His Nephews Leuies, which to him appeared
To be a preparation against the Poleak:
But better looked into, he truly found
It was against your Highness, whereat grieved,]
That so his Sickness, Age, and Impotence
Was falsely borne in hand, sends out Arrests
On Fortinbras, which he (in brief) obeyes,
Receives rebuke from Norwey: and in fine,
Makes Vow before his Uncle, never more
To give the assay of Arms against your Majesty.
Whereon old Norwey, overcome with joy,
Gives him three thousand Crowns in Annual Fee,
And his Commission to employ those Soldiers
So levied as before, against the Poleak:
With an entreaty herein further shown,
That it might please you to give quiet pass
Through your Dominions, for his Enterprise,
On such regards of safety and allowance,
As therein are set down.

It likes us well:
And at our more considered time we will read,
Answer, and think upon this Business.
Mean time we thank you, for your well-tooke Labor.
Go to your rest, at night we will Feast together.
Most welcome home.

This business is very well ended.
My Liege, and Madam, to expostulate
What Majesty should be, what Duty is,
Why day is day; night, night; and time is time,
Were nothing but to waste Night, Day* and Time.
Therefore, since Brevity is the Soul of Wit,
And tediousness, the limbs and outward flourishes,
I will be brief. Your Noble Son is mad:
Mad call I it; for to define true Madness,
What is it, but to be nothing else but mad.
But let that go.

More matter, with less Art.


Madam* I swear I use no Art at all:
That he is mad, it is true: It Is true it is pity,
And pity it is true: A foolish figure,
But farewell it: for I will use no Art.
Mad let us grant him then: and now remains
That we find out the cause of this effect,
Or rather say, the cause of this defect;
For this effect defective, comes by cause,
Thus it remains, and the remainder thus. Perpend,
I have a daughter: have, whilst she is mine,
Who in her Duty and Obedience, mark,
Has given me this: now gather, and surmise.
That Is an ill Phrase, a vilde Phrase, beautified is a vilde Phrase: but you
shall hear these in her excellent white bosom, these

Came this from Hamlet to her.


Good Madam stay awhile, I will be faithful.

Doubt thou, the Stars are fire,
Doubt, that the Sun does move:
Doubt Truth to be a Lier,
But never Doubt, I love.
O dear Ophelia, I am ill at these Numbers: I have not Art to reckon my
groans; but that I love thee best, oh most Best believe it. Adieu.

Thine evermore most dear Lady, whilst this Machine is to him, Hamlet.



This in Obedience has my daughter showed me:
And more above has his soliciting,
As they fell out by Time, by Means, and Place,
All given to mine ear.

But how has she received his Love?


What do you think of me?


As of a man, faithful and Honorable.


I would feign prove so. But what might you think?
When I had seen this hot love on the wing,
As I perceived it, I must tell you that
Before my Daughter told me, what might you
Or my dear Majesty your Queen here, think,
If I had played the Deske or Table-booke,
Or given my heart a winking, mute and dumb,
Or looked upon this Love, with idle sight,
What might you think? No, I went round to work,
And (my young Mistress) thus I did bespeake
Lord Hamlet is a Prince out of thy Star,
This must not be: and then, I Precepts gave her,
That she should lock her self from his Resort,
Admit no Messengers, receive no Tokens:
Which done, she took the Fruits of my Advice,
And he repulsed. A short Tale to make,
Fell into a Sadness, then into a Fast,
Thence to a Watch, thence into a Weakness,
Thence to a Lightness, and by this declension
Into the Madness whereon now he raues,
And all we wail for.

Do you think it is this?


It may be very likely.


Has there been such a time, I Would fain know that,
That I have possitiuely said, it is so,
When it proved otherwise?

Not that I know.


Take this from this; if this be otherwise,
If Circumstances lead me, I will find
Where truth is hid, though it were hid indeed
Within the Center.

How may we try it further?


You know sometimes
He walks four hours together, here
In the Lobby.

So he has indeed.


At such a time I Will loose my Daughter to him,
Be you and I behind an Arras then,
Mark the encounter: If he love her not,
And be not from his reason fallen thereon;
Let me be no Assistant for a State,
And keep a Farm and Carters.

We will try it.


But look where sadly the poor wretch Comes reading.


Away I do beseech you, both away,
I Will board him presently.
Oh give me leave. How does my good Lord Hamlet?

Well, God-a-mercy.


Do you know me, my Lord?


Excellent, excellent well: y' are a Fishmonger.


Not I my Lord.


Then I would you were so honest a man.


Honest, my Lord?


I sir, to be honest as this world goes, is to be one man picked out of two
thousand


That Is very true, my Lord.


For if the Sun breed Magots in a dead dog, being a good kissing Carrion --
Have you a daughter?

I have my Lord.


Let her not walk in the Sun: Conception is a blessing, but not as your
daughter may conceive. Friend look to it


How say you by that? Still harping on my daughter: yet he knew me not at
first; he said I was a Fishmonger: he is far gone, far gone: and truly in
my youth, I suffered much extremity for love: very near this. I Will speak to
him again. What do you read my Lord


Words, words, words.


What is the matter, my Lord?


Between who?


I mean the matter you mean, my Lord.


Slanders Sir: for the Satyricall slave says here, that old men have gray
Beards; that their faces are wrinkled; their eyes purging thick Amber, or
Plum-Tree Gum: and that they have a plentiful lock of Wit, together with
weak Hammes. All which Sir, though I most powerfully, and potently believe;
yet I hold it not Honesty to have it thus set down: For you your self Sir,
should be old as I am, if like a Crab you could go backward


Though this be madness,
Yet there is Method in it: will you walk
Out of the air my Lord?

Into my Grave?


Indeed that is out of the Air:
How pregnant (sometimes) his Replies are?
A happiness,
That often Madness hits on,
Which Reason and Sanitie could not
So prosperously be delivered of.
I will leave him,
And suddenly contriue the means of meeting
Between him, and my daughter.
My Honorable Lord, I will most humbly
Take my leave of you.

You cannot Sir take from me any thing, that I will more willingly part
withal, except my life, my life


Fare you well my Lord.


These tedious old fools.


You go to seek my Lord Hamlet; there he is.


God save you Sir.


Mine honored Lord?


My most dear Lord?


My excellent good friends? How do thou Guildensterne? Oh, Rosincrane* good
Lads: How do ye both


As the indifferent Children of the earth.


Happy, in that we are not ouer-happy: on Fortunes Cap, we are not the very
Button


Nor the Soales of her Shoo?


Neither my Lord.


Then you live about her waste, or in the middle of her favor?


Faith, her priuates, we.


In the secret parts of Fortune? Oh, most true ^ she is a Strumpet. What Is the
news


None my Lord; but that the World's grown honest.


Then is Doomesday near: But your news is not true. Let me question more in
particular: what have you my good friends, deserved at the hands of Fortune,
that she sends you to Prison hither


Prison, my Lord?


Denmark's a Prison.


Then is the World one.


A goodly one, in which there are many Confines, Wards, and Dungeons; Denmark
being one of the worst


We think not so my Lord.


Why then it is none to you; for there is nothing either good or bad, but
thinking makes it so: to me it is a prison


Why then your Ambition makes it one: it is too narrow for your mind.


O God, I could be bounded in a nutshell, and count my self a King of infinite
space; were it not that I have bad dreams


Which dreams indeed are Ambition: for the very substance of the Ambitious, is
merely the shadow of a Dream


A dream it self is but a shadow.


Truly, and I hold Ambition of so ayry and light a quality, that it is but a
shadows shadow


Then are our Beggars bodies; and our Monarchs and out-stretcht Heroes the
Beggars Shadows: shall we to the Court: for, by my fey I cannot reason


We Will wait upon you.


No such matter. I will not sort you with the rest of my servants: for to
speak to you like an honest man: I am most dreadfully attended; but in the
beaten way of friendship. What make you at Elsonower


To visit you my Lord, no other occasion.


Beggar that I am, I am even poor in thanks; but I thank you: and sure dear
friends my thanks are too dear a halfepeny; were you not sent for? Is it your
own inclining? Is it a free visitation? Come, deal justly with me: come,
come; nay speak


What should we say my Lord?


Why any thing. But to the purpose; you were sent for; and there is a kind
confession in your looks; which your modesties have not craft enough to color,
I know the good King and Queen have sent for you


To what end my Lord?


That you must teach me: but let me conjure you by the rights of our
fellowship, by the consonancy of our youth, by the Obligation of our
euer-preserued love, and by what more dear, a better proposer could charge you
withal; be even and direct with me, whether you were sent for or no


What say you?


Nay then I have an eye of you: if you love me hold not off.


My Lord, we were sent for.


I will tell you why; so shall my anticipation prevent your discovery of your
secricie to the King and Queen: moult no feather, I have of late, but
wherefore I know not, lost all my mirth, forgone all custom of exercise; and
indeed, it goes so heavenly with my disposition; that this goodly frame the
Earth, seems to me a sterrill Promontory; this most excellent Canopy the Air,
look you, this brave ore-hanging, this Maiesticall Roof, fretted with golden
fire: why, it appears no other thing to me, then a foul and pestilent
congregation of vapors. What a piece of work is a man! how Noble in Reason?
how infinite in faculty? in form and moving how express and admirable? in
Action, how like an Angel? in apprehension, how like a God? the beauty of the
world, the Parragon of Animals; and yet to me, what is this Quintessence of
Dust? Man delights not me; no, nor Woman neither; though by your smiling you
seem to say so


My Lord, there was no such stuff in my thoughts.


Why did you laugh, when I said, Man delights not me?


To think, my Lord, if you delight not in Man, what Lenton entertainment the
Players shall receive from you: we coated them on the way, and hither are they
coming to offer you Service


He that plays the King shall be welcome; his Majesty shall have Tribute of
me: the aduenturous Knight shall use his Foil and Target: the Lover shall not
sigh gratis, the humorous man shall end his part in peace: the Clown shall
make those laugh whose lungs are tickled a' the sere: and the Lady shall say
her mind freely; or the blanke Verse shall halt for it: what Players are they


Even those you were wont to take delight in the Tragedians of the City.


How chances it they travail? their residence both in reputation and profit
was better both ways


I think their Inhibition comes by the means of the late Innovation?


Do they hold the same estimation they did when I was in the City? Are they so
followed


No indeed, they are not.


How comes it? do they grow rusty?


Nay, their endeavor keeps in the wonted pace; But there is Sir an ayrie of
Children, little Yases, that cry out on the top of question; and are most
tyrannically clap't for it: these are now the fashion, and so be-ratled the
common Stages (so they call them) that many wearing Rapiers, are affraide of
Goose-quils, and dare scarce come thither


What are they Children? Who maintains 'em? How are they escoted? Will they
pursue the Quality no longer then they can sing? Will they not say afterward
if they should grow themselves to common Players (as it is like most if their
means are not better) their Writers do them wrong, to make them exclaim
against their own Succession


Faith there has been much to do on both sides: and the Nation holds it no
sin, to tar them to Controversy. There was for a while, no money bid for
argument, unless the Poet and the Player went to Cuffes in the Question


Is It possible?


Oh there has been much throwing about of Brains.


Do the Boys carry it away?


I that they do my Lord. Hercules and his load too.


It is not strange: for mine Uncle is King of Denmark, and those that would
make mowes at him while my Father lived; give twenty, forty, an hundred Ducates
a piece, for his picture in Little. There is something in this more then
Natural, if Philosophy could find it out


There are the Players.


Gentlemen, you are welcome to Elsonower: your hands, come: The appurtenance of
Welcome, is Fashion and Ceremony. Let me comply with you in the Garb, left my
extent to the Players (which I tell you must show fairly outward) should more
appear like entertainment then yours. You are welcome: but my Uncle Father,
and Aun^ Mother are deceived


^ that my dear Lord?


(...) but mad North, North-West: when the Wind is Southerly ^ know a Hawke
from a Handsaw


Well be with you Gentlemen.


Hark you Guildensterne, and you too: at each care a hearer: that great Baby
you see there, is not yet out of his swathing clouts


Happily he is the second time come to them: for they say, an old man is twice a
child


I will Prophecy. He comes to tell me of the Players. Mark it, you say right
Sir: for a Monday morning 'twas so indeed


My Lord, I have News to tell you.


My Lord, I have News to tell you.
When Rossius an Actor in Rome --

The Actors are come hither my Lord.


Buzze, buzze.


Upon mine Honor.


Then can each Actor on his Ass --


The best Actors in the world, either for Tragedy, Comedy, History,
Pastoral: Pastoricall-Comicall-Historicall-Pastorall: Tragicall-Historicall:
Tragicall-Comicall-Historicall-Pastorall: Scene indiuible, or Poem unlimited.
Seneca cannot be too heavy, nor Plautus too light, for the law of Writ, and the
Liberty. These are the only men


O Iephta Judge of Israel, what a Treasure had thou?


What a Treasure had he, my Lord?


Why one fair Daughter, and no more*
The which he loved passing well.

Still on my Daughter.


Am I not in the right old Iephta?


If you call me Iephta my Lord, I have a daughter that I love passing well.


Nay that follows not.


What follows then, my Lord?


Why, As by lot, God wot: and then you know, It came to pass, as most like it
was: The first row of the Pons Chans^n will show you more. For look where my
Abridgements come

Y' are welcome Masters, welcome all. I am glad to see thee well: Welcome good
Friends. O my old Friend? Thy face is valiant since I saw thee last: Come
thou to beard me in Denmark? What, my young Lady and Mistress? Byrlady your
Ladyship is nearer Heaven then when I saw you last, by the altitude of a
Choppine. Pray God your voice like a piece of vncurrant Gold be not cracked
within the ring. Masters, you are all welcome: we will e'ne to it like French
Faulconers, fly at any thing we see: we will have a Speech straight. Come give
us a taste of your quality: come, a passionate speech


What speech, my Lord?


I heard thee speak me a speech once, but it was never Acted: or if it was, not
above once, for the Play I remember pleased not the Million, 'twas Cauiarie to
the General: but it was (as I received it, and others, whose judgment in such
matters, cried in the top of mine) an excellent Play: well digested in the
Scoenes, set down with as much modesty, as cunning. I remember one said,
there was no Sallets in the lines, to make the matter sauoury; nor no matter in
the phrase, that might indite the Author of affectation, but called it an honest
method. One chief Speech in it, I cheefely loved, 'twas Aeneas Tale to Dido,
and thereabout of it especially, where he speaks of Priams slaughter. If it
live in your memory, begin at this Line, let me see, let me see: The rugged
Pyrrhus like the Hyrcanian Beast. It is not so: it begins with Pyrrhu

The rugged Pyrrhus, he whose Sable Arms
Black as his purpose, did the night resemble
When he lay couched in the Ominous Horse,
Has now this dread and black Complexion smeared
With Heraldry more dismal: Head to foot
Now is he to take Geulles, horridly Tricked
With blood of Fathers, Mothers, Daughters, Sons,
Baked and impasted with the parching streets,
That lend a tyrannous, and damned light
To their vilde Murders, roasted in wrath and fire,
And thus o're-sized with coagulate gore,
With eyes like Carbuncles, the hellish Pyrrhus
Old Grandsire Priam seeks.

Fore God, my Lord, well spoken, with good accent* and good discretion.


Anon he finds him,
Striking too short at Greeks. His anticke Sword,
Rebellious to his Arm, lies where it falls
Repugnant to command: unequal match,
Pyrrhus it Priam drives, in Rage strikes wide:
But with the whiffe and wind of his fell Sword,
The vnnerued Father falls. Then senseless Illium,
Seeming to feel his blow, with flaming top
Stoopes to his Bace, and with a hideous crash
Takes Prisoner Pyrrhus ear. For lo, his Sword
Which was declining on the Milkie head
Of Reverend Priam, seemed in the Air to stieke:
So as a painted Tyrant Pyrrhus stood,
And like a Newtrall to his will and matter, did nothing.
But as we often see against some storm,
A silence in the Heavens, the Rack stand still,
The bold winds speechless, and the Orb below
As hush as death: Anon the dreadful Thunder
Does rend the Region. So after Pyrrhus pause,
A rowsed Vengeance sets him new a-worke,
And never did the Cyclops hammers fall
On Mars his Armours, forged for proof Eterne,
With less remorse then Pyrrhus bleeding sword
Now falls on Priam.
Out, out, thou Strumpet-Fortune, all you Gods,
In general Synod take away her power:
Break all the Spokes and Fallies from her wheel,
And boule the round Naue down the hill of Heaven,
As low as to the Fiends.

This is too long.


It shall to 'th Barbars, with your beard. Prithee say on: He Is for a Iigge, or
a tale of Baudry, or he sleeps. Say on; come to Hecuba


But who, O who, had seen the inobled Queen.


The inobled Queen?


That Is good: Inobled Queen is good.


Run barefoot up and down,
Threatening the flame
With Bisson Rheum: A clout about that head,
Where late the Diadem stood, and for a Robe
About her lanke and all ore-teamed Lomes,
A blanket in the Alarm of fear caught up.
Who this had seen, with tongue in Venom steeped,
Against Fortunes State, would Treason have pronounced?
But if the Gods themselves did see her then,
When she saw Pyrrhus make malicious sport
In mincing with his Sword her Husbands limbs,
The instant Burst of Clamor that she made
(Unless things mortal move them not at all)
Would have made milche the Burning eyes of Heaven,
And passion in the Gods.

Look where he has not turned his color, and has tears in's eyes. Pray you
no more


'I is well, I Will have thee speak out the rest, soon. Good my Lord, will you
see the Players well bestowed. Do ye hear, let them be well used: for they are
the Abstracts and brief Chronicles of the time. After your death, you were
better have a bad Epitaph, then their ill report while you lived


My Lord, I will use them according to their desert.


Gods bodykins man, better. Use every man after his desert, and who should
escape whipping: use them after your own Honor and Dignity. The less they
deserve, the more merit is in your bounty. Take them in


Come sirs.


Follow him Friends: we will hear a play to morrow. Do thou hear me old
Friend, can you play the murder of Gonzago


I my Lord.


We Will have it to morrow night. You could for a need study a speech of some dosen
or sixteen lines, which I would set down, and insert in it? Could ye not


I my Lord.


Very well. Follow that Lord, and look you mock him not. My good Friends, I Will
leave you til night you are welcome to Elsonower


Good my Lord.


I so, God buy'ye: Now I am alone.
Oh what a Rogue and Pesant slave am I?
Is it not monstrous that this Player here,
But in a Fixion, in a dream of Passion,
Could force his soul so to his whole conceit,
That from her working, all his visage warmed;
Tears in his eyes, distraction in's Aspect,
A broken voice, and his whole Function suiting
With Forms, to his Conceit? And all for nothing?
For Hecuba?
What Is Hecuba to him, or he to Hecuba,
That he should weep for her? What would he do,
Had he the Motive and the Cue for passion
That I have? He would drown the Stage with tears,
And cleave the general ear with horrid speech:
Make mad the guilty, and apale the free,
Confound the ignorant, and amaze indeed,
The very faculty of Eyes and Ears Yet I,
A dull and muddy-metled Rascal, peake
Like John a-dreames, vnpregnant of my cause,
And can say nothing: No, not for a King,
Upon whose property, and most dear life,
A damned defeat was made. Am I a Coward?
Who calls me Villain? breaks my pate a-crosse?
Pluckes off my Beard, and blows it in my face?
Tweakes me by' the Nose? gives me the Lie in the Throat,
As deep as to the Lungs? Who does me this?
Ha? Why I should take it: for it cannot be,
But I am Pigeon-Liuer'd, and lack Gall
To make Oppression bitter, or ere this,
I should have fatted all the Region Kites
With this Slaves Offall, bloody: a Bawdy villain,
Remorselesse, Treacherous, Letcherous, kindles villain!
Oh Vengeance!
Who? What an Ass am I? I sure, this is most brave,
That I, the Son of the Dear murdered,
Prompted to my Revenge by Heaven, and Hell,
Must (like a Whore) vnpacke my heart with words,
And fall a Cursing like a very Drab,
A Scullion? Fie upon it: Foh. About my Brain.
I have heard, that guilty Creatures sitting at a Play,
Have by the very cunning of the Scoene,
Been struck so to the soul, that presently
They have proclaimed their Malefactions.
For Murder, though it have no tongue, will speak
With most myraculous Organ. I Will have these Players,
Play something like the murder of my Father,
Before mine Uncle. I Will observe his looks,
I Will tent him to the quick: If he but blench
I know my course. The Spirit that I have seen
May be the Devil, and the Devil has power
TO assume a pleasing shape, yea and perhaps
Out of my Weakness, and my Melancholy,
As he is very potent with such Spirits,
Abuses me to damn me. I Will have grounds
More Relative then this: The Play's the thing,
Wherein I Will catch the Conscience of the King.

And can you by no drift of circumstance
Get from him why he puts on this Confusion:
Grating so harshly all his days of quiet
With turbulent and dangerous Lunacy.

He does confess he feels himself distracted,
But from what cause he will by no means speak.

Nor do we find him forward to be sounded,
But with a crafty Madness keeps aloof:
When we would bring him on to some Confession
Of his true state.

Did he receive you well?


Most like a Gentleman.


But with much forcing of his disposition.


Niggard of question, but of our demands
Most free in his reply.

Did you assay him to any pastime?


Madam, it so fell out, that certain Players
We ore-wrought on the way: of these we told him,
And there did seem in him a kind of joy
To hear of it: They are about the Court,
And (as I think) they have already order
This night to play before him.

It Is most true:
And he beseech'd me to entreat your Majesty's
To hear, and see the matter.

With all my heart, and it does much content me
To hear him so inclined. Good Gentlemen,
Give him a further edge, and drive his purpose on
To these delights.

We shall my Lord.


Sweet Gertrude leave us too,
For we have closely sent for Hamlet hither,
That he, as 'twere by accident, may there
Affront Ophelia. Her Father, and my self (lawful espials)
Will so bestow our selves, that seeing unseen
We may of their encounter frankely judge,
And gather by him, as he is behaved,
If It be the affliction of his love, or no.
That thus he suffers for.

I shall obey you,
And for your part Ophelia, I do wish
That your good Beauties be the happy cause
Of Hamlets wildenesse: so shall I hope your Virtues
Will bring him to his wonted way again,
To both your Honors.

Madam, I wish it may.


Ophelia, walk you here. Gracious so please ye
We will bestow our selves: Read on this book,
That show of such an exercise may color
Your loneliness. We are often too blame in this,
It Is too much proved, that with Devotions visage,
And pious Action, we do surge over
The devil himself.

Oh it is true:
How smart a lash that speech does give my Conscience?
The Harlots Cheek beautied with plaist'ring Art
Is not more ugly to the thing that helps it,
Then is my deed, to my most painted word.
Oh heavy burden!

I hear him coming, let us withdraw my Lord.


To be, or not to be, that is the Question:
Whether it is Nobler in the mind to suffer
The Slings and Arrows of outrageous Fortune,
Or to take Arms against a Sea of troubles,
And by opposing end them: to dye, to sleep
No more; and by a sleep, to say we end
The Heart-ake, and the thousand Natural shockes
That Flesh is heir too? It Is a consummation
Devoutly to be wished. To dye to sleep,
To sleep, perchance to Dream; I, there is the rub,
For in that sleep of death, what dreams may come,
When we have shufflel'd off this mortal coile,
Must give us pawse. There Is the respect
That makes Calamity of so long life:
For who would bear the Whips and Scorns of time,
The Oppressors wrong, the poor man's Contumely,
The pangs of dispriz'd Love, the Laws delay,
The insolence of Office, and the Spurns
That patient merit of the unworthy takes,
When he himself might his Quietus make
With a bare Bodkin? Who would these Fardles bear
To grunt and sweat under a weary life,
But that the dread of something after death,
The undiscovered Country, from whose Borne
No Traveler returns, Puzels the will,
And makes us rather bear those illes we have,
Then fly to others that we know not of.
Thus Conscience does make Cowards of us all,
And thus the Native hew of Resolution
Is sicklied over, with the pale cast of Thought,
And enterprises of great pith and moment,
With this regard their Currants turn away,
And loose the name of Action. Soft you now,
The fair Ophelia? Nymph, in thy Orizons
Be all my sins remembered.

Good my Lord,
How does your Honor for this many a day?

I humbly thank you: well, well, well.


My Lord, I have Remembrances of yours,
That I have longed long to re-deliuer.
I pray you now, receive them.

No, no, I never gave you ought.


My honored Lord, I know right well you did,
And with them words of so sweet breath composed,
As made the things more rich, then perfume left:
Take these again, for to the Noble mind
Rich gifts wax poor, when giuers prove unkind.
There my Lord.

Ha, ha: Are you honest?


My Lord.


Are you fair?


What means your Lordship?


That if you be honest and fair, your Honesty should admit no discourse to
your Beauty


Could Beauty my Lord, have better Comerce then your Honesty?


I truly: for the power of Beauty, will sooner transform Honesty from what
it is, to a Bawd, then the force of Honesty can translate Beauty into his
likeness. This was sometime a Paradox, but now the time gives it proof. I did
love you once


Indeed my Lord, you made me believe so.


You should not have believed me. For virtue cannot so innocculate our old
stock, but we shall-rellish of it. I loved you not


I was the more deceived.


Get thee to a Nunnerie. Why would thou be a breeder of Sinners? I am my
self indifferent honest, but yet I could accuse me of such things, that it
were better my Mother had not borne me. I am very proud, reuengefull,
Ambitious, with more offenses at my beck, then I have thoughts to put them in
imagination, to give them shape, or time to act them in. What should such
Fellows as I do, crawling between Heaven and Earth. We are arrant Knaves all,
believe none of us. Go thy ways to a Nunnery. Where Is your Father


At home, my Lord.


Let the doors be shut upon him, that he may play the Fool no way, but in's
own house. Farewell


O help him, you sweet Heavens.


If thou do Marry, I Will give thee this Plague for thy Dowry. Be thou as
chaste as Ice, as pure as Snow, thou shall not escape Calumny. Get thee to a
Nunnery. Go, Farewell. Or if thou will needs Marry, marry a fool: for Wise men
know well enough, what monsters you make of them. To a Nunnery go, and quickly
too. Farewell


O heavenly Powers, restore him.


I have heard of your pratlings too well enough. God has given you one pace, and
you make your self another: you gidge, you amble, and you lispe, and nickname
Gods creatures, and make your Wantonness, your Ignorance. Go too, I Will no more
on it, it has made me mad. I say, we will have no more Marriages. Those that
are married already, all but one shall live, the rest shall keep as they are.
To a Nunnery, go


O what a Noble mind is here o're-throwne?
The Courtiers, Soldiers, Scholars: Eye, tongue, sword,
The expectansie and Rose of the fair State,
The glass of Fashion, and the mould of Form,
The observed of all Obseruers, quite, quite down.
Have I of Ladies most deiect and wretched,
That sucked the Honey of his Music Vows:
Now see that Noble, and most Sovereign Reason,
Like sweet Bells ^angled out of tune, and harsh,
That vnmatch'd Form and Feature of blown youth,
Blasted with ecstasy. Oh woe is me,
TO have seen what I have seen: see what I see.

Love? His affections do not that way tend,
Nor what he spoke, though it lacked Form a little,
Was not like Madness. There Is something in his soul?
Over which his Melancholy sits on brood,
And I do doubt the hatch, and the disclose
Will be some danger, which to prevent
I have in quick determination
Thus set it down. He shall with speed to England
For the demand of our neglected Tribute:
Happily the Seas and Countries different
With variable Objects, shall expel
This something settled matter in his heart:
Whereon his Brains still beating, puts him thus
From fashion of himself. What think you on it?

It shall do well. But yet do I believe
The Origin and Commencement of this grief
Sprung from neglected love. How now Ophelia?
You need not tell us, what Lord Hamlet said,
We heard it all. My Lord, do as you please,
But if you hold it fit after the Play,
Let his Queen Mother all alone entreat him
To show his Greefes: let her be round with him,
And I Will be placed so, please you in the ear
Of all their Conference. If she find him not,
To England send him: Or confine him where
Your wisdom best shall think.

It shall be so:
Madness in great Ones, must not vnwatch'd go.

Speak the Speech I pray you, as I pronounced it to you trippingly on the
Tongue: But if you mouth it, as many of your Players do, I had as live the
Town-Cryer had spoke my Lines: Nor do not saw the Air too much your hand thus,
but use all gently; for in the very Torrent, Tempest, and (as I may say) the
Whirle-winde of Passion, you must acquire and beget a Temperance that may give
it Smoothness. O it offends me to the Soul, to see a robustious
Pery-wig-pated Fellow, tear a Passion to tatters, to very rags, to split
the ears of the Groundlings: who (for the most part) are capeable of nothing,
but inexplicable dumb shows, and noise: I could have such a Fellow whipped for
o're-doing Termagant: it out- Herod's Herod. Pray you avoid it


I warrant your Honor.


Be not too tame neither: but let your own Discretion be your Tutor. Suit the
Action to the Word, the Word to the Action, with this special observance: That
you ore-stop not the modesty of Nature; for any thing so ouer-done, is from
the purpose of Playing, whose end both at the first and now, was and is, to
hold as it were the Mirror up to Nature; to show Virtue her own Feature, Scorn
her own Image, and the very Age and Body of the Time, his form and
pressure. Now, this ouer-done, or come tardie off, though it make the
unskillful laugh, cannot but make the Judicious grieve; The censure of the
which One, must in your allowance o're-way a whole Theater of Others. Oh, there
be Players that I have seen Play, and heard others praise, and that highly
(not to speak it profanely) that neither having the accent of Christians, nor
the gate of Christian, Pagan, or Norman, have so strutted and bellowed, that I
have thought some of Natures Iouerney-men had made men, and not made them well,
they imitated Humanity so abhominably


I hope we have reformed that indifferently with us, Sir.


O reform it altogether. And let those that play your Clownes, speak no more
then is set down for them. For there be of them, that will themselves laugh,
to set on some quantity of barren Spectators to laugh too, though in the mean
time, some necessary Question of the Play be then to be considered: that is
Villainous, and shows a most pitiful Ambition in the Fool that uses it. Go
make you ready


How now my Lord,
Will the King hear this piece of Work?

And the Queen too, and that presently.


Bid the Players make have.
Will you two help to hasten them?

We will my Lord.


What hoa, Horatio?


Here sweet Lord, at your Service.


Horatio, thou art eene as just a man
As ere my Conversation coap'd withal.

O my dear Lord.


Nay, do not think I flatter:
For what advancement may I hope from thee,
That no Reuennew have, but thy good spirits
To feed and cloth thee. Why should the poor be flattered?
No, let the Candied tongue, like absurd pomp,
And crook the pregnant Hindges of the knee,
Where thrift may follow faining? Do thou hear,
Since my dear Soul was Mistress of my choice,
And could of men distinguish, her election
Has sealed thee for her self. For thou have been
As one in suffering all, that suffers nothing.
A man that Fortunes buffets, and Rewards
Has 'tane with equal Thanks. And blessed are those,
Whose Blood and Judgment are so well co-mingled,
That they are not a Pipe for Fortunes finger,
To sound what stop she please. Give me that man,
That is not Passions Slave, and I will wear him
In my hearts Core: I, in my Heart of heart,
As I do thee. Something too much of this.
There is a Play to night before the King,
One Scoene of it comes near the Circumstance
Which I have told thee, of my Fathers death.
I prithee, when thou see that Act a-foot,
Even with the very Comment of my Soul
Observe mine Uncle: If his occulted guilt,
Do not it self vnkennell in one speech,
It is a damned Ghost that we have seen:
And my Imaginations are as foul
As Vulcans Stythe. Give him needful note,
For I mine eyes will riuet to his Face:
And after we will both our judgments join,
To censure of his seeming.

Well my Lord.
If he steal ought the whilst this Play is Playing,
And escape detecting, I will pay the Theft.

They are coming to the Play: I must be idle.
Get you a place.

How fares our Cousin Hamlet?


Excellent In Faith, of the Camelions dish: I eat the Air promise-cramm'd, you
cannot feed Capons so


I have nothing with this answer Hamlet, these words are not mine.


No, nor mine. Now my Lord, you played once in the University, you say?


That I did my Lord, and was accounted a good Actor.


And what did you enact?


I did enact Julius Caesar, I was killed in the Capitol:
Brutus killed me.

It was a brute part of him, to kill so Capital a Calfe there. Be the Players
ready


I my Lord, they stay upon your patience.


Come hither my good Hamlet, sit by me.


No good Mother, here is Mettle more attractiue.


Oh ho, do you mark that?


Lady, shall I lie in your Lap?


No my Lord.


I mean, My Head upon your Lap?


I my Lord.


Do you think I meant Country matters?


I think nothing, my Lord.


That Is a fair thought to ly between Maids legs


What is my Lord?


Nothing.


You are merry, my Lord?


Who I?


I my Lord.


Oh God, your only Iigge-maker: what should a man do, but be merry. For look
you now cheerfully my Mother looks, and my Father dyed within's two Hours


Nay, it is twice two months, my Lord.


So long? Nay then let the Devil wear black, for I Will have a suite of Sables.
Oh Heavens! dye two months ago, and not forgotten yet? Then there is hope, a
great man's Memory, may out-liue his life half a year: But byrlady he must
build Churches then: or else shall he suffer not thinking on, with the
Hoby-horsse, whose Epitaph is, For o, For o, the Hoby-horse is forgot


What means this, my Lord?


Marry this is Miching Malicho, that means Mischief.


Belike this show imports the Argument of the Play?


We shall know by these Fellows: the Players cannot keep counsel, they will
tell all


Will they tell us what this show meant?


I, or any show that you will show him. Be not you ashamed to show, he will not
shame to tell you what it means


You are naught, you are naught, I Will mark the Play.


For us, and for our Tragedy,
Here stooping to your Clemency:
We beg your hearing Patiently.

Is this a Prologue, or the Poesy of a Ring?


It Is brief my Lord.

As Woman's love.

Full thirty times has Phoebus Cart gone round,
Neptunes salt Wash, and Tellus Orbed ground:
And thirty dozen Moons with borrowed sheene,
About the World have times twelve thirties been,
Since love our hearts, and Hymen did our hands
Unite comutuall, in most sacred Bands.

So many iournies may the Sun and Moon
Make us again count over, ere love be duone.
But woe is me, you are so sick of late,
So far from cheer, and from your form state,
That I distrust you: yet though I distrust,
Discomfort you (my Lord) it nothing must:
For women's Fear and Love, holds quantity,
In neither ought, or in extremity:
Now what my love is, proof has made you know,
And as my Love is sized, my Fear is so.

Faith I must leave thee Love, and shortly too:
My operant Powers my Functions leave to do:
And thou shall live in this fair world behind,
Honored, beloved, and happily, one as kind.
For Husband shall thou --

Oh confound the rest:
Such Love, must needs be Treason in my breast:
In second Husband, let me be accursed,
None wed the second, but who killed the first.

Wormwood, Wormwood.


The instances that second Marriage move,
Are base respects of Thrist, but none of Love.
A second time, I kill my Husband dead,
When second Husband kisses me in Bed.

I do believe you. Think what now you speak:
But what we do determine, often we break:
Purpose is but the slave to Memory,
Of violent Birth, but poor validity:
Which now like Fruit unripe sticks on the Tree,
But fall unshaken, when they mellow be.
Most necessary it is, that we forget
To pay our selves, what to our selves is debt:
What to our selves in passion we propose,
The passion ending, does the purpose lose.
The violence of other Grief or Joy,
Their own ennactors with themselves destroy:
Where Joy most Revels, Grief does most lament;
Grief joys, Joy greeues on slender accident.
This world is not for aye, nor it is not strange
That even our Loves should with our Fortunes change.
For it is a question left us yet to prove,
Whether Love lead Fortune, or else Fortune Love.
The great man down, you mark his favorites flies,
The poor advanced makes Friends of Enemies:
And hitherto does Love on Fortune tend,
For who not needs, shall never lack a Friend:
And who in want a hollow Friend does try,
Directly seasons him his Enemy.
But orderly to end, where I begun,
Our Wills and Fates do so contrary run,
That our Devices still are overthrown,
Our thoughts are ours, their ends none of our own.
So think thou will no second Husband wed.
But die thy thoughts, when thy first Lord is dead.

Nor Earth to give me food, nor Heaven light,
Sport and repose lock from me day and night:
Each opposite that blankes the face of joy,
Meet what I would have well, and it destroy:
Both here, and hence, pursue me lasting strife,
If once a Widow, ever I be Wife.

If she should break it now.


It Is deeply sworn:
Sweet, leave me here a while,
My spirits grow dull, and feign I would beguile
The tedious day with sleep.

Sleep rock thy Brain,
And never come mischance between us twain.

Madam, how like you this Play?


The Lady protests to much me thinks.


Oh but she will keep her word.


Have you heard the Argument, is there no Offense in it?


No, no, they do but jest, poison in jest, no Offense in the world.


What do you call the Play?


The Mouse-trap: Marry how? Tropically: This Play is the Image of a murder done
in Vienna: Gonzago is the Dukes name, his wife Baptista: you shall see anon:
it is a knauish piece of work: But what of that? Your Majesty, and we that
have free souls, it touches us not: let the gail d^iade winch: our withers are
vnrung

This is one Lucianus nephew to the King.


You are a good Chorus, my Lord.


I could interpret between you and your love: if I could see the Puppets
dallying


You are keen my Lord, you are keen.


It would cost you a groaning, to take off my edge.


Still better and worse.


So you mistake Husbands.
Begin Murderer. Pox, leave thy damnable Faces, and begin.
Come, the croaking Raven does bellow for Revenge.

Thoughts black, hands apt,
Drugges fit, and Time agreeing:
Confederate season, else, no Creature seeing:
Thou mixture rank, of Midnight Weeds collected,
With Hecats Ban, thrice blasted, thrice infected,
Thy natural Magic, and dire property,
On wholesome life, usurp immediately.

He poisons him in th Garden for's estate: His name's Gonzago: the Story is
extant and writ in choice Italian. You shall see anon how the Murderer gets
the love of Gonzago's wife


The King rises.


What, frighted with false fire.


How fares my Lord?


Give over the Play.


Give me some Light. Away.


Lights, Lights, Lights.


Why let the stricken Dear go weep,
The Heart vngalled play:
For some must watch, while some must sleep;
So runs the world away.
Would not this Sir, and a Forest of Feathers, if the rest of my Fortunes
turn Turk with me; with two Provincial Roses on my rac'd Shoes, get me a
Fellowship in a cry of Players sir


Half a share.


A whole one I,
For thou do know: Oh Damon dear,
This Realm dismantled was of Jove himself,
And now reigns here.
A very very Paiocke.

You might have Rim'd.


Oh good Horatio, I Will take the Ghosts word for a thousand pound. Did
perceive


Very well my Lord.


Upon the talk of the poisoning?


I did very well note him.


Oh, ha? Come some Music. Come ye Recorders:
For if the King like not the Comedy,
Why then belike he likes it not perdie.
Come some Music.

Good my Lord, vouchsafe me a word with you.


Sir, a whole History.


The King, sir.


I sir, what of him?


Is in his retyrement, marvelous distempered.


With drink Sir?


No my Lord, rather with choler.


Your wisdom should show it self more richer, to signify this to his
Doctor: for for me to put him to his Purgation, would perhaps plundge him into
far more Choler


Good my Lord put your discourse into some frame, and start not so wildely from
my affayre


I am tame Sir, pronounce.


The Queen your Mother, in most great affliction of spirit, has sent me to
you


You are welcome.


Nay, good my Lord, this courtesy is not of the right breed. If it shall
please you to make me a wholesome answer, I will do your Mothers command'ment:
if not, your pardon, and my return shall be the end of my Business


Sir, I cannot.


What, my Lord?


Make you a wholesome answer: my wits diseased. But sir, such answers as I can
make, you shall command: or rather you say, my Mother: therefore no more but to
the matter. My Mother you say


Then thus she says: your behauior has stroke her into amazement, and
admiration


Oh wonderful Son, that can so astonish a Mother. But is there no sequel at
the heels of this Mothers admiration


She desires to speak with you in her Closset, ere you go to bed.


We shall obey, were she ten times our Mother.
Have you any further Trade with us?

My Lord, you once did love me.


So I do still, by these pickers and stealers.


Good my Lord, what is your cause of distemper? You do freely bar the door
of your own Liberty, if you deny your greefes to your Friend


Sir I lack Advancement.


How can that be, when you have the voice of the King himself, for your
Succession in Denmark


I, but while the grass grows, the Proverb is something musty.

O the Recorder. Let me see, to withdraw with you, why do you go about to
recover the wind of me, as if you would drive me into a toil


O my Lord, if my Duty be too bold, my love is too unmannerly.


I do not well understand that. Will you play upon this Pipe?


My Lord, I cannot.


I pray you.


Believe me, I cannot.


I do beseech you.


I know no touch of it, my Lord.


It Is as easy as lying: govern these Ventiges with your finger and thumb,
give it breath with your mouth, and it will discourse most excellent Music.
Look you, these are the stoppes


But these cannot I command to any utterance of hermony, I have not the skill.


Why look you now, how unworthy a thing you make of me: you would play upon
me; you would seem to know my stops: you would pluck out the heart of my
Mystery; you would sound me from my lowest Note, to the top of my Compass:
and there is much Music, excellent Voice, in this little Organe, yet cannot
you make it. Why do you think, that I am easier to be played on, then a Pipe?
Call me what Instrument you will, though you can fret me, you cannot play upon
me. God bless you Sir


My Lord; the Queen would speak with you, and presently.


Do you see that Clowd? that is almost in shape like a Camel.


By' the Miss, and it is like a Camel indeed.


Me thinks it is like a Weazell.


It is backed like a Weazell.


Or like a Whale?


Very like a Whale.


Then will I come to my Mother, by and by:
They fool me to the top of my bent.
I will come by and by.

I will say so.


By and by, is easily said. Leave me Friends:
It Is now the very witching time of night,
When Churchyards yawne, and Hell it self breaths out
Contagion to this world. Now could I drink hot blood,
And do such bitter business as the day
Would quake to look on. Soft now, to my Mother:
Oh Heart, loose not thy Nature; let not ever
The Soul of Nero, enter this firm bosom:
Let me be cruel, not unnatural,
I will speak Daggers to her, but use none:
My Tongue and Soul in this be Hypocrites.
How in my words someuer she be shent,
To give them Seals, never my Soul consent.

I like him not, nor stands it safe with us,
To let his madness range. Therefore prepare you,
I your Commission will forthwith dispatch,
And he to England shall along with you:
The terms of our estate, may not endure
Hazard so dangerous as does hourly grow
Out of his Lunacies.

We will our selves provide:
Most holy and Religious fear it is
To keep those many many bodies safe
That live and feed upon your Majesty.

The single
And peculiar life is bound
With all the strength and Armor of the mind,
To keep it self from noyance: but much more,
That Spirit, upon whose spirit depends and rests
The lives of many, the cease of Majesty
Dies not alone; but like a Gulf does draw
What Is near it, with it. It is a massy wheel
Fixed on the Somnet of the highest Mount,
To whose huge Spoakes, ten thousand lesser things
Are mortiz'd and adioyn'd: which when it falls,
Each small annexment, petty consequence
Attends the boystrous Ruin. Never alone
Did the King sighe, but with a general groan.

Arm you, I pray you to this speedy Voyage;
For we will Fetters put upon this fear,
Which now goes too free-footed.

We will haste us.


My Lord, he is going to his Mothers Closset:
Behind the Arras I Will convey my self
To hear the Process. I Will warrant she will tax him home,
And as you said, and wisely was it said,
It Is meet that some more audience then a Mother,
Since Nature makes them partial, should o're-heare
The speech of vantage. Ear you well my Liege,
I Will call upon you ere you go to bed,
And tell you what I know.

Thanks dear my Lord.
Oh my offense is rank, it smells to heaven,
It has the primall eldest curse upon it,
A Brothers murder. Pray can I not,
Though inclination be as sharp as will:
My stronger guilt, defeats my strong intent,
And like a man to double business bound,
I stand in pause where I shall first begin,
And both neglect; what if this cursed hand
Were thicker then it self with Brothers blood,
Is there not Rain enough in the sweet Heavens
To wash it white as Snow? Whereto serves mercy,
But to confront the visage of Offense?
And what is in Prayer, but this twofold force,
To be fore-stalled ere we come to fall,
Or pardoned being down? Then I Will look up,
My fault is past. But oh, what form of Prayer
Can serve my turn? Forgive me my foul Murder:
That cannot be, since I am still possessed
Of those effects for which I did the Murder.
My Crown, mine own Ambition, and my Queen:
May one be pardoned, and retain the offense?
In the corrupted currants of this world,
Offenses gilded hand may shoue by Justice,
And often it is seen, the wicked prize it self
Buys out the Law; but it is not so above,
There is no shuffling, there the Action lies
In his true Nature, and we our selves compelled
Even to the teeth and forehead of our faults,
To give in evidence. What then? What rests?
Try what Repentance can. What can it not?
Yet what can it, when one cannot repent?
Oh wretched state! Oh bosom, black as death!
Oh limed soul, that struggling to be free,
Art more engaged: Help Angels, make assay:
Bow stubborn knees, and heart with strings of Steel,
Be soft as sinews of the newborn Babe,
All may be well.

Now might I do it pat, now he is praying,
And now I Will do it, and so he goes to Heaven,
And so am I revenged: that would be scanned,
A Villain killes my Father, and for that
I his foul Son, do this same Villain send
To heaven. Oh this is hyre and Sallery, not Revenge.
He took my Father grossly, full of bread,
With all his Crimes broad blown, as fresh as May,
And how his Audit stands, who knows, save Heaven:
But in our circumstance and course of thought
It Is heavy with him: and am I then revenged,
To take him in the purging of his Soul,
When he is fit and seasoned for his passage? No.
Up Sword, and know thou a more horrid hent
When he is drunk asleep: or in his Rage,
Or in the incestuous pleasure of his bed,
At gaming, swearing, or about some act
That has no relish of Salvation in it,
Then trip him, that his heels may kick at Heaven,
And that his Soul may be as damned and black
As Hell, whereto it goes. My Mother stays,
This Physic but prolongs thy sickly days.

My words fly up, my thoughts remain below,
Words without thoughts, never to Heaven go.

He will come straight:
Look you lay home to him,
Tell him his prankes have been too broad to bear with,
And that your Grace has scree'nd, and stood between
Much heat, and him. I Will silence me e'ene here:
Pray you be round with him.

Mother, mother, mother.


I Will warrant you, fear me not.
Withdraw, I hear him coming.

Now Mother, what is the matter?


Hamlet, thou have thy Father much offended.


Mother, you have my Father much offended.


Come, come, you answer with an idle tongue.


Go, go, you question with an idle tongue.


Why how now Hamlet?


What Is the matter now?


Have you forgot me?


No by the Rood, not so:
You are the Queen, your Husbands Brothers wife,
But would you were not so. You are my Mother.

Nay, then I Will set those to you that can speak.


Come, come, and sit you down, you shall not boudge:
You go not till I set you up a glass,
Where you may see the inmost part of you?

What will thou do? thou will not murder me?
Help, help, hoa.

What hoa, help, help, help.


How now, a Rat? dead for a Ducate, dead.


Oh I am slain.


Oh me, what have thou done?


Nay I know not, is it the King?


Oh what a rash, and bloody deed is this?


A bloody deed, almost as bad good Mother,
As kill a King, and marry with his Brother.

As kill a King?


I Lady, 'twas my word.
Thou wretched, rash, intruding fool farewell,
I took thee for thy Betters, take thy Fortune,
Thou find'st to be too busy, is some danger.
Lean wringing of your hands, peace, sit you down,
And let me wring your heart, for so I shall
If it be made of penetrable stuff;
If damned Custom have no braz'd it so,
That it is proof and bulwark against Sense.

What have I done, that thou dare wag thy tongue,
In noise so rude against me?

Such an Act
That blurres the grace and blush of Modesty,
Calls Virtue Hypocrite, takes off the Rose
From the fair forehead of an innocent love,
And makes a blister there. Makes marriage vows
As false as Dicers Oaths. Oh such a deed,
As from the body of Contraction pluckes
The very soul, and sweet Religion makes
A rapsidie of words. Heavens face does glow,
Yea this solidity and compound mass,
With tristfull visage as against the doom,
Is thought-sicke at the act.

Aye me; what act, that roares so loud, and thunders in the Index.


Look here upon this Picture, and on this,
The counterfeit presentment of two Brothers:
See what a grace was seated on his Brow,
Hyperions curles, the front of Jove himself,
An eye like Mars, to threaten or command
A Station, like the Herald Mercury
New lighted on a heauen-kissing hill:
A Combination, and a form indeed,
Where every God did seem to set his Seal,
To give the world assurance of a man.
This was your Husband. Look you now what follows.
Here is your Husband, like a Mildew'd ear
Blasting his wholesome breath. Have you eyes?
Could you on this fair Mountain leave to feed,
And batten on this Moore? Ha? Have you eyes?
You cannot call it Love: For at your age,
The hey-day in the blood is tame, it is humble,
And waits upon the Judgment: and what Judgment
Would step from this, to this? What devil was it,
That thus has cousend you at hoodman-blinde?
O Shame! where is thy Blush? Rebellious Hell,
If thou can mutine in a Matrons bones,
To flaming youth, let Virtue be as wax,
And melt in her own fire. Proclaim no shame,
When the compulsiue Ardure gives the charge,
Since Frost it self, as actiuely does burn,
As Reason panders Will.

O Hamlet, speak no more.
Thou turn'st mine eyes into my very soul,
And there I see such black and grained spots,
As will not leave their Tinct.

Nay, but to live
In the rank sweat of an enseamed bed,
Stewed in Corruption; honying and making love
Over the nasty Stye.

Oh speak to me, no more,
These words like Daggers enter in mine ears.
No more sweet Hamlet.

A Murderer, and a Villain:
A Slave, that is not twentieth part the tithe
Of your precedent Lord. A vice of Kings,
A Cutpurse of the Empire and the Rule.
That from a shelfe* the precious Diadem stole,
And put it in his Pocket.

No more.


A King of shreds and patches.
Save me; and houer over me with your wings
You heavenly Guards. What would you gracious figure?

Alas he is mad.


Do you not come your tardy Son to chide,
That laps't in Time and Passion, lets go by
The important acting of your dread command? Oh say.

Do not forget: this Visitation
Is but to whet thy almost blunted purpose.
But look Amazement on thy Mother fits;
O step between her, and her fighting Soul,
Conceit in weakest bodies, strongest works.
Speak to her Hamlet.

How is it with you Lady?


Alas, how is it with you?
That you bend your eye on vacancie,
And with their corporal air do hold discourse.
Forth at your eyes, your spirits wildely peep,
And as the sleeping Soldiers in the Alarm,
Your bedded hair, like life in excrements,
Start up, and stand an end. Oh gentle Son,
Upon the heat and flame of thy distemper
Sprinkle cool patience. Whereon do you look?

On him, on him: look you how pale he glares,
His form and cause conioyn'd, preaching to stones,
Would make them capeable. Do not look upon me,
Least with this pitteous action you convert
My stern effects: then what I have to do,
Will want true color; tears perchance for blood.

To who do you speak this?


Do you see nothing there?


Nothing at all, yet all that is I see.


Nor did you nothing hear?


No, nothing but our selves.


Why look you there: look how it steals away:
My Father in his habit, as he lived,
Look where he goes even now out at the Portall.

This is the very coynage of your Brain,
This bodilesse Creation ecstasy is very cunning i^.

Ecstasy?
My Pulse as yours does temperately keep time,
And makes as healthful Music. It is not madness
That I have uttered; bring me to the Test
And I the matter will re-word: which madness
Would gamboll from. Mother, for love of Grace,
Lay not a flattering Unction to your soul,
That not your trespass, but my madness speaks:
It will but skin and filme the Vlcerous place,
Whilst rank Corruption mining all within,
Infects unseen. Confess your self to Heaven,
Repent what is past, avoid what is to come,
And do not spread the Compost or the Weeds,
To make them rank. Forgive me this my Virtue,
For in the fatness of this pursie times,
Virtue it self, of Vice must pardon beg,
Yea courb, and woe, for leave to do him good.

Oh Hamlet,
Thou have cleft my heart in twain.

O throw away the worser part of it,
And live the purer with the other half.
Good night, but go not to mine Uncles bed,
Assume a Virtue, if you have it not, refrain to night,
And that shall lend a kind of easiness
To the next abstinence. Once more goodnight,
And when you are desirous to be blessed,
I Will blessing beg of you. For this same Lord,
I do repent: but heaven has pleased it so,
To punish me with this, and this with me,
That I must be their Scourge and Minister.
I will bestow him, and will answer well
The death I gave him: so again, good night*
I must be cruel, only to be kind;
Thus bad begins, and worse remains behind.

What shall I do?


Not this by no means that I bid you do:
Let the blunt King tempt you again to bed,
Pinch Wanton on your cheek, call you his Mouse,
And let him for a pair of reechie kisses,
Or padling in your neck with his damned Fingers,
Make you to rauell all this matter out,
That I essentially am not in madness,
But made in craft. 'Twere good you let him know,
For who that is but a Queen, fair, sober, wise,
Would from a Paddocke, from a Bat, a Gibbe,
Such dear concernings hide, Who would do so,
No in despite of Sense and Secrecy,
Vnpegge the Basket on the houses top:
Let the Birds fly, and like the famous Ape
To try Conclusions in the Basket, creep
And break your own neck down.

Be thou assured, if words be made of breath,
And breath of life: I have no life to breath
What thou have said to me.

I must to England, you know that?


Alack I had forgot: It Is so concluded on.


This man shall set me packing:
I Will lugge the Guts into the Neighbor room,
Mother goodnight. Indeed this Counselor
Is now most still, most secret, and most grave,
Who was in life, a foolish prating Knave.
Come sir, to draw toward an end with you.
Good night Mother.

There Is matters in these sighs.
These profound heaues
You must translate; It Is fit we understand them.
Where is your Son?

Ah my good Lord, what have I seen to night?


What Gertrude? How does Hamlet?


Mad as the Seas, and wind, when both contend
Which is the Mightier, in his lawless fit
Behind the Arras, hearing something stir,
He whips his Rapier out, and cries a Rat, a Rat,
And in his brainish apprehension killes
The unseen good old man.

Oh heavy deed:
It had bin so with us had we been there:
His Liberty is full of threats to all,
To you your self, to us, to every one.
Alas, how shall this bloody deed be answered?
It will be laid to us, whose providence
Should have kept short, restrained, and out of haunt,
This mad young man. But so much was our love,
We would not understand what was most fit,
But like the Owner of a foul disease,
To keep it from divulging, let us it feed
Even on the pith of life. Where is he gone?

To draw apart the body he has killed,
Over whom his very madness like some Oar
Among a Mineral of Mettels base
Shows it self pure. He weeps for what is done.

Oh Gertrude, come away:
The Sun no sooner shall the Mountains touch,
But we will ship him hence, and this vilde deed,
We must with all our Majesty and Skill
Both countenance, and excuse.
Ho Guildenstern:
Friends both go join you with some further aid:
Hamlet in madness has Polonius slain,
And from his Mother Clossets has he dragged him.
Go seek him out, speak fair, and bring the body
Into the Chapel. I pray you have in this.
Come Gertrude, we will call up our wisest friends,
To let them know both what we mean to do,
And what is untimely done. Oh come away,
My soul is full of discord and dismay.

Safely stowed.


Hamlet, Lord Hamlet.


What noise? Who calls on Hamlet?
Oh here they come.

What have you done my Lord with the dead body?


Compounded it with dust, whereto it is Kin.


Tell us where it is* that we may take it thence,
And bear it to the Chapel.

Do not believe it.


Believe what?


That I can keep your counsel, and not mine own. Besides, to be demanded of
a Spundge, what replication should be made by the Son of a King


Take you me for a Spundge, my Lord?


I sir, that sokes up the Kings Countenance, his Rewards, his Authorities (but
such Officers do the King best service in the end. He keeps them like an Ape
in the corner of his iaw, first mouthed to be last swallowed, when he needs
what you have gleaned, it is but squeezing you, and Spundge you shall be dry
again


I understand you not my Lord.


I am glad of it: a knauish speech sleeps in a foolish ear.


My Lord, you must tell us where the body is, and go with us to the King.


The body is with the King, but the King is not with the body. The King, is a
thing --


A thing my Lord?


Of nothing: bring me to him, hide Fox, and all after.


I have sent to seek him, and to find the body:
How dangerous is it that this man goes loose:
Yet must not we put the strong Law on him:
He Is loved of the distracted multitude,
Who like not in their judgment, but their eyes:
And where it is so, the Offenders scourge is weighed
But nearer the offense: to bear all smooth, and even,
This sudden sending him away, must seem
Deliberate pause, diseases desperate grown,
By desperate appliance are relieved,
Or not at all.
How now? What has befalne?

Where the dead body is bestowed my Lord,
We cannot get from him.

But where is he?


Without my Lord, guarded to know your pleasure.


Bring him before us.


Hoa, Guildensterne? Bring in my Lord.


Now Hamlet, where is Polonius?


At Supper.


At Supper? Where?


Not where he eats, but where he is eaten, a certain convocation of worms are
e'ne at him. Your worm is your only Emperor for diet. We fat all creatures
else to fat us, and we fat our self for Magots. Your fat King, and your lean
Beggar is but variable service to dishes, but to one Table that is the end


What do thou mean by this?


Nothing but to show you how a King may go a Progress through the guts of a
Beggar


Where is Polonius.


In heaven, send thither to see. If your Messenger find him not there, seek
him in th other place your self: but indeed, if you find him not this month,
you shall nose him as you go up the stairs into the Lobby


Go seek him there.


He will stay till ye come.


Hamlet, this deed of thine, for thine especial safety
Which we do tender, as we dearly grieve
For that which thou have done, must send thee hence
With fiery Quickness. Therefore prepare thy self,
The Bark is ready, and the wind at help,
The Associates tend, and every thing at bent
For England.

For England?


I Hamlet.


Good.


So is it, if thou knew'st our purposes.


I see a Cherube that see's him: but come, for England. Farewell dear Mother.


Thy loving Father Hamlet.


My Mother: Father and Mother is man and wife: man and wife is one flesh, and
so my mother. Come, for England


Follow him at foot,
Tempt him with speed aboard:
Delay it not, I Will have him hence to night.
Away, for every thing is Sealed and done
That else leanes on the Affair, pray you make haft.
And England, if my love thou holdst at ought,
As my great power thereof may give thee sense,
Since yet thy Cicatrice looks raw and red
After the Danish Sword, and thy free awe
Pays homage to us; thou may not coldly set
Our Sovereign Process, which imports at full
By Letters coniuring to that effect
The present death of Hamlet. Do it England,
For like the Hecticke in my blood he rages,
And thou must cure me: Till I know it is done,
How ere my happes, my joys were never begun.

Go Captain, from me greet the Danish King,
Tell him that by his license, Fortinbras
Claims the conueyance of a promised March
Over his Kingdom. You know the Rendeuous:
If that his Majesty would ought with us,
We shall express our duty in his eye,
And let him know so.

I will do it, my Lord.


Go safely on.


I will not speak with her.


She is importunate, indeed distract, her mood will needs be pitied.


What would she have?


She speaks much of her Father; says she hears
There Is tricks in the world, and hems, and beats her heart,
Spurns enuiously at Strawes, speaks things in doubt,
That carry but half sense: Her speech is nothing,
Yet the vnshaped use of it does move
The hearers to Collection; they aim at it,
And botch the words up fit to their own thoughts,
Which as her winkes, and nods, and gestures yield them,
Indeed would make one think there would be thought,
Though nothing sure, yet much unhappily.

'Twere good she were spoken with,
For she may strew dangerous conjectures
In ill breeding minds. Let her come in.
To my sick soul (as sins true Nature is)
Each toy seems Prologue, to some great amiss,
So full of Artlesse jealousy is guilt,
It spill's it self, in fearing to be spilt.

Where is the beauteous Majesty of Denmark.


How now Ophelia?


How should I your true love know from another one?
By his Cockle hat and staff, and his Sandal shoone.

Alas sweet Lady: what imports this Song?


Say you? Nay pray you mark.
He is dead and gone Lady, he is dead and gone,
At his head a grasse-greene Turfe, at his heels a stone.

Nay but Ophelia.


Pray you mark.
White his Shrowed as the Mountain Snow.

Alas, look here my Lord.


Larded with sweet flowers:
Which bewept to the grave did not go,
With true-loue showers.

How do ye, pretty Lady?


Well, God dil'd you. They say the Owl was a Bakers daughter. Lord, we know
what we are, but know not what we may be. God be at your Table


Conceit upon her Father.


Pray you let us have no words of this: but when they ask you what it means,
say you this

Tomorrow is S. Valentines day, all in the morning betime,
And I a Maid at your Window to be your Valentine.
Then up he rose, and don'd his clothes, and dupt the chamber door,
Let in the Maid, that out a Maid, never departed more.

Pretty Ophelia.


Indeed la? without an oath I Will make an end out.

By gis, and by S. Charity,
Alack, and sie for shame:
Young men will do it, if they come to it,
By Cock they are too blame.
Quoth she before you tumbled me,
You promised me to Wed:
So would I ha done by yonder Sun,
And thou had not come to my bed.

How long has she bin this?


I hope all will be well. We must be patient, but I cannot choose but weep,
to think they should lay him in the cold ground: My brother shall know of it,
and so I thank you for your good counsel. Come, my Coach: Goodnight Ladies:
Goodnight sweet Ladies: Goodnight, goodnight


Follow her close,
Give her good watch I pray you:
Oh this is the poison of deep grief, it springs
All from her Fathers death. Oh Gertrude, Gertrude,
When sorrows comes, they come not single spies,
But in Battaliaes. First, her Father slain,
Next your Son gone, and he most violent Author
Of his own just remove: the people muddied,
Thick and unwholesome in their thoughts, and whispers
For good Polonius death; and we have, done but greenly
In hugger mugger to interre him. Poor Ophelia
Divided from her self, and her fair Judgment,
Without the which we are Pictures, or mere Beasts.
Last, and as much containing as all these,
Her Brother is in secret come from France,
Keeps on his wonder, keeps himself in clouds,
And wants not Buzzers to infect his ear
With pestilent Speeches of his Fathers death,
Where in necessity of matter Beggard,
Will nothing stick our persons to Arraigne
In ear and ear. O my dear Gertrude, this,
Like to a murdering Piece in many places,
Gives me superfluous death.

Alack, what noise is this?


Where are my Switzers?
Let them guard the door. What is the matter?

Save your self, my Lord.
The Ocean (ouer-peering of his List)
Eats not the Flats with more impittious haste
Then young Laertes, in a Riotous head,
Ore-beares your Officers, the rabble call him Lord,
And as the world were now but to begin,
Antiquity forgot, Custom not known,
The Ratifiers and props of every word,
They cry choose we? Laertes shall be King,
Caps, hands, and tongues, applaud it to the clouds,
Laertes shall be King, Laertes King.

How cheerfully on the false Traile they cry,
Oh this is Counter you false Danish Dogs.

The doors are broke.


Where is the King, sirs? Stand you all without.


No, let us come in.


I pray you give me leave.


We will, we will.


I thank you: Keep the door.
Oh thou vilde King, give me my Father.

Calmely good Laertes.


That drop of blood, that calmes
Proclaims me Bastard:
Cries Cuckold to my Father, brands the Harlot
Even here between the chaste vnsmirched brow
Of my true Mother.

What is the cause Laertes,
That thy Rebellion looks so Gyant-like?
Let him go Gertrude: Do not fear our person:
There Is such Divinity does hedge a King,
That Treason can but peep to what it would,
Acts little of his will. Tell me Laertes,
Why thou art thus Incenst? Let him go Gertrude.
Speak man.

Where Is my Father?


Dead.


But not by him.


Let him demand his fill.


How came he dead? I Will not be Iuggel'd with.
To hell Allegiance: Vows, to the blackest devil.
Conscience and Grace, to the profoundest Pit.
I dare Damnation: to this point I stand,
That both the worlds I give to negligence,
Let come what comes: only I Will be revenged
Most thoroughly for my Father.

Who shall stay you?


My Will, not all the world,
And for my means, I Will husband them so well,
They shall go far with little.

Good Laertes:
If you desire to know the certainty
Of your dear Fathers death, if writ in your revenge,
That Soop-stake you will draw both Friend and Foe,
Winner and Looser.

None but his Enemies.


Will you know them then.


To his good Friends, thus wide I Will open my Arms:
And like the kind Life-rend'ring Politician,
Repast them with my blood.

Why now you speak
Like a good Child, and a true Gentleman.
That I am guiltless of your Fathers death,
And am most sensible in grief for it,
It shall as level to your Judgment pierce
As day does to your eye.

How now? what noise is that?
Oh heat dry up my Brains, tears seven times salt,
Burn out the Sense and Virtue of mine eye.
By Heaven, thy madness shall be paid by weight,
Till our Scale turns the beam. Oh Rose of May,
Dear Maid, kind Sister, sweet Ophelia:
Oh Heavens, is it possible, a young Maids wits,
Should be as mortal as an old man's life?
Nature is fine in Love, and where it is fine,
It sends some precious instance of it self
After the thing it loves.

They bore him bare faced on the Beer,
Hey non nony, nony, hey nony:
And on his grave raines many a tear,
Fare you well my Dove.

Had thou thy wits, and did persuade Revenge, it could not move thus.


You must sing down a-downe, and you call him a-downe-a. Oh, how the wheel
becomes it? It is the false Steward that stole his masters daughter


This nothings more then matter.


There Is Rosemary, that is for Remembrance.
Pray love remember: and there is Paconcies, that is for Thoughts.

A document in madness, thoughts and remembrance fitted.


There Is Fennel for you, and Columbines: there is Rue for you, and here is some
for me. We may call it Herbe-Grace a Sundaies: Oh you must wear your Rue with
a difference. There Is a Daysie, I would give you some Violets, but they
withered all when my Father dyed: They say, he made a good end


Thought, and Affliction, Passion, Hell it self:
She turns to Favor, and to prettiness.

And will he not come again,
And will he not come again:
No, no, he is dead, go to thy Deathbed,
He never will come again.
His Beard as white as Snow,
All Flaxen was his Pole:
He is gone, he is gone, and we cast away moan,
Gramercy on his Soul.
And of all Christian Souls, I pray God.
God buy ye.

Do you see this, you Gods?


Laertes, I must common with your grief,
Or you deny me right: go but apart,
Make choice of whom your wisest Friends you will,
And they shall hear and judge 'twixt you and me;
If by direct or by Colaterall hand
They find us touched, we will our Kingdom give,
Our Crown, our Life, and all that we call Ours
To you in satisfaction. But if not,
Be you content to lend your patience to us,
And we shall jointly labor with your soul
To give it due content.

Let this be so:
His means of death, his obscure burial;
No Trophee, Sword, nor Hatchment over his bones,
No Noble rite, nor formal ostentation,
Cry to be heard, as 'twere from Heaven to Earth,
That I must call in question.

So you shall:
And where the offense is, let the great Axe fall.
I pray you go with me.

What are they that would speak with me?


Saylors sir, they say they have Letters for you.


Let them come in,
I do not know from what part of the world
I should be greeted, if not from Lord Hamlet.

God bless you Sir.


Let him bless thee too.


He shall Sir, and't please him. There Is a Letter for you Sir: It comes from
the Ambassadors that was bound for England, if your name be Horatio, as I am
let to know it is

HOratio, When thou shall have ouerlook'd this, give these Fellows some means
to the King: They have Letters for him. Ere we were two days old at Sea, a
Pyrate of very Warlicke appointment gave us Chase. Finding our selves too slow
of Sail, we put on a compelled Valor. In the Grapple, I boorded them: On the
instant they got clear of our Ship, so I alone became their Prisoner. They
have dealt with me, like Thieves of Mercy, but they knew what they did. I am
to do a good turn for them. Let the King have the Letters I have sent, and
repair thou to me with as much have as thou would fly death. I have words
to speak in your ear, will make thee-dumbe, yet are they much too light for
the bore of the Matter. These good Fellows will bring thee where I am.
Rosincrance and Guildensterne, hold their course for England. Of them I have
much to tell thee, Farewell

He that thou know thine, Hamlet.

Come, I will give you way for these your Letters,
And do it the speedier, that you may direct me
To him from whom you brought them.

Now must your conscience my acquittance seal,
And you must put me in your heart for Friend,
Since you have heard, and with a knowing ear,
That he which has your Noble Father slain,
Pursued my life.

It well appears. But tell me,
Why you proceeded not against these feats,
So crimefull, and so Capital in Nature,
As by your Safety, Wisdom, all things else,
You mainly were stirred up?

O for two special Reasons,
Which may to you (perhaps) seem much vnsinnowed,
And yet to me they are strong. The Queen his Mother,
Lives almost by his looks: and for my self,
My Virtue or my Plague, be it either which,
She Is so coniunctiue to my life and soul;
That as the Star moves not but in his Sphere,
I could not but by her. The other Motive,
Why to a public count I might not go,
Is the great love the general gender bear him,
Who dipping all his Faults in their affection,
Would like the Spring that turns Wood to Stone,
Convert his Gyues to Graces. So that my Arrows
Too slightly timbred for so loud a Wind,
Would have reuerted to my Bow again,
And not where I had armed them.

And so have I a Noble Father lost,
A Sister driven into desperate terms,
Who was (if praises may go back again)
Stood Challenger on mount of all the Age
For her perfections. But my revenge will come.

Break not your sleeps for that,
You must not think
That we are made of stuff, so flat, and dull,
That we can let our Beard be shook with danger,
And think it pastime. You shortly shall hear more,
I loved your Father, and we love our Self,
And that I hope will teach you to imagine --
How now? What News?

Letters my Lord from Hamlet. This to your Majesty: this to the Queen.


From Hamlet? Who brought them?


Saylors my Lord they say, I saw them not:
They were given me by Claudio, he received them.

Laertes you shall hear them:
Leave us.
High and Mighty, you shall know I am set naked on your Kingdom. To morrow
shall I beg leave to see your Kingly Eyes. When I shall (first asking your
Pardon thereunto) recount the Occasions of my sudden, and more strange
return.

Hamlet.



What should this mean? Are all the rest come back?
Or is it some abuse? Or no such thing?

Know you the hand?


It Is Hamlets Character, naked and in a Postscript here he says alone: Can you
advise me


I Am lost in it my Lord; but let him come,
It warmes the very sickness in my heart,
That I shall live and tell him to his teeth;
Thus did thou.

If it be so Laertes, as how should it be so:
How otherwise will you be ruled by me?

If so you will not over rule me to a peace.


To thine own peace: if he be now returned,
As checking at his Voyage, and that he means
No more to undertake it; I will work him
To an exployt now ripe in my Device,
Under the which he shall not choose but fall;
And for his death no wind of blame shall breath,
But even his Mother shall vncharge the practice,
And call it accident: Some two Months hence
Here was a Gentleman of Normandy,
I Have seen my self, and served against the French,
And they ran well on Horseback; but this Gallant
Had witchcraft in it; he grew into his Seat,
And to such wondrous doing brought his Horse,
As had he been encorps't and demy-Natur'd
With the brave Beast, so far he past my thought,
That I in forgery of shapes and tricks,
Come short of what he did.

A Norman was it?


A Norman.


Upon my life Lamound.


The very same.


I know him well, he is the Brooch indeed,
And Iemme of all our Nation.

He mad confession of you,
And gave you such a Masterly report,
For Art and exercise in your defense;
And for your Rapier most especially,
That he cried out, to would be a sight indeed,
If one could match you Sir. This report of his
Did Hamlet so envenom with his Envy,
That he could nothing do but wish and beg,
Your sudden coming ore to play with him;
Now out of this.

Why out of this, my Lord?


Laertes was your Father dear to you?
Or are you like the painting of a sorrow,
A face without a heart?

Why ask you this?


Not that I think you did not love your Father,
But that I know Love is begun by Time:
And that I see in passages of proof,
Time qualifies the spark and fire of it:
Hamlet comes back: what would you undertake,
To show your self your Fathers son indeed,
More then in words?

To cut his throat in the Church.


No place indeed should murder Sancturize;
Revenge should have no bounds: but good Laertes
Will you do this, keep close within your Chamber,
Hamlet returned, shall know you are come home:
We Will put on those shall praise your excellence,
And set a double varnish on the fame
The Frenchman gave you, bring you in fine together,
And wager on your heads, he being remiss,
Most generous, and free from all contriuing,
Will not peruse the Foiles? So that with ease,
Or with a little shuffling, you may choose
A Sword vnbaited, and in a pass of practice,
Requit him for your Father.

I will do it,
And for that purpose I Will anoint my Sword:
I bought an Unction of a Mountebanke
So mortal, I but dipped a knife in it,
Where it draws blood, no Cataplasme so rare,
Collected from all Simples that have Virtue
Under the Moon, can save the thing from death,
That is but scratcht withal: I Will touch my point,
With this contagion, that if I gall him slightly,
It may be death.

Let Us further think of this,
Weigh what conuenience both of time and means
May fit us to our shape, if this should fail;
And that our drift look through our bad performance,
'Twere better not assaid; therefore this Project
Should have a back or second, that might hold,
If this should blast in proof: Soft, let me see
We Will make a solemn wager on your commings,
I have it: when in your motion you are hot and dry,
As make your bowts more violent to the end,
And that he calls for drink; I Will have prepared him
A Challice for the nonce; whereon but sipping,
If he by chance escape your venomed stuck,
Our purpose may hold there; how sweet Queen.

One woe does tread upon another heel,
So fast they will follow: your Sister's drowned Laertes.

Drowned! O where?


There is a Willow grows aslant a Brook,
That shows his hoar leaves in the glassie stream:
There with fantastic Garlands did she come,
Of Crow-slowers, Nettles, Daysies, and long Purples,
That liberal Shepherds give a grosser name;
But our cold Maids do Dead Men's Fingers call them:
There on the pendant boughs, her Coronet weeds
Clambring to hang; an envious sliuer broke,
When down the weedy Trophies, and her self,
Fell in the weeping Brook, her clothes spread wide,
And Mermaid-like, a while they bore her up,
Which time she chaunted snatches of old tunes,
As one incapable of her own distress,
Or like a creature Native, and endued
Unto that Element: but long it could not be,
Till that her garments, heavy with her drink,
Pulled the poor wretch from her melodious buy,
To muddy death.

Alas then, is she drowned?


Drowned, drowned.


Too much of water have thou poor Ophelia,
And therefore I forbid my tears: but yet
It is our trick, Nature her custom holds,
Let shame say what it will; when these are gone
The woman will be out: Adue my Lord,
I have a speech of fire, that feign would blaze,
But that this folly doubts it.

Let Us follow, Gertrude:
How much I had to do to calm his rage?
Now fear I this will give it start again;
Therefore let us follow.

Is she to be buried in Christian burial, that wilfully seeks her own
salvation


I tell thee she is, and therefore make her Grave straight, the Crowner has
sat on her, and finds it Christian burial


How can that be, unless she drowned her self in her own defense?


Why it is found so.


It must be Se offendendo, it cannot be else: for here lies the point; If I
drown my self wittingly, it argues an Act: and an Act has three branches. It
is an Act to do and to perform; argall she drowned her self wittingly


Nay but hear you Goodman Deluer.


Give me leave; here lies the water; good: here stands the man; good: If the
man go to this water and drown himsele; it is will he nill he, he goes; mark
you that? But if the water come to him and drown him; he drownes not
himself. Argall, he that is not guilty of his own death, shortens not his
own life


But is this law?


I marry is it, Crowners Quest Law.


Will you ha the truth on it: if this had not been a Gentlewoman, she should
have been buried out of Christian Burial


Why there thou say. And the more pity that great folk should have
countenance in this world to drown or hang themselves, more then their even
Christian. Come, my Spade; there is no ancient Gentlemen, but Gardiners,
Ditchers and Graue-makers; they hold up Adams Profession


Was he a Gentleman?


He was the first that ever bore Arms.


Why he had none.


What, ar't a Heathen? how do thou understand the Scripture? the Scripture
says Adam dig'd; could he dig without Arms? I Will put another question to
thee; if thou answerest me not to the purpose, confess thy self --


Go too.


What is he that builds stronger then either the Mason, the Shipwright, or the
Carpenter


The Gallows maker; for that Frame outliues a thousand Tenants.


I like thy wit well in good faith, the Gallows does well; but how does it
well? it does well to those that do ill: now, thou do ill to say the
Gallows is built stronger then the Church: Argall, the Gallows may do well
to thee. To It again, Come


Who builds stronger then a Mason, a Shipwright, or a Carpenter?


I, tell me that, and vnyoake.


Marry, now I can tell.


To It.


Mass, I cannot tell.


Cudgel thy brains no more about it; for your dull Ass will not mend his
pace with beating; and when you are ask't this question next, say a
Graue-maker: the Houses that he makes, lasts till Doomesday: go, get thee to
Yaughan, fetch me a stoop of Liquor

In youth when I did love, did love,
me thought it was very sweet:
To contract O the time for a my behoue,
O me thought there was nothing meet.

Has this fellow no feeling of his business, that he sings at Graue-making?


Custom has made it in him a property of easiness.


It Is even so; the hand of little Employment has the daintier sense.


But Age with his stealing steps
has caught me in his clutch:
And has shipped me intill the Land,
as if I had never been such.

That Scull had a tongue in it, and could sing once: how the knave iowles it to
the grownd as if it were Caines Iaw-bone, that did the first murder: It might
be the Pate of a Politician which this Ass over Offices: one that could
circumuent God, might it not


It might, my Lord.


Or of a Courtier, which could say, Good Morrow sweet Lord: how do thou, good
Lord? this might be my Lord such a one, that praised my Lord such a ones Horse,
when he meant to beg it; might it not


I, my Lord.


Why even so: and now my Lady Worms, Chaplesse, and knocked about the Mazard
with a Sextons Spade; here is fine Revolution, if we had the trick to see it.
Did these bones cost no more the breeding* but to play at Loggets with 'em?
mine ache to think on it


A Pickhaxe and a Spade, a Spade,
for and a shrowding-Sheete:
O a Pit of Clay for to be made,
for such a Guest is meet.

There Is another: why might not that be the Scull of of a Lawyer? where be his
Quiddits now? his Quillets? his Cases? his Tenures, and his Tricks? why does
he suffer this rude knave now to knock him about the Sconce with a dirty
Shouell, and will not tell him of his Action of Battery? hum. This fellow might
be in's time a great buyer of Land, with his Statutes, his Recognizances, his
Fines, his double Vouchers, his Recoueries: Is this the fine of his Fines, and
the recovery of his Recoueries, to have his fine Pate full of fine Dirt? will
his Vouchers vouch him no more of his Purchases, and double ones too, then the
length and breadth of a pair of Indentures? the very Conueyances of his Lands
will hardly lie in this Box; and must the Inheritor himself have no more? ha


Not a jot more, my Lord.


Is not Parchment made of Sheep-skinnes?


I my Lord, and of Calue-skinnes too.


They are Sheep and Calves that seek out assurance in that. I will speak to
this fellow: whose Graue's this Sir


Mine Sir:
O a Pit of Clay for to be made,
for such a Guest is meet.

I think it be thine indeed: for thou lie in it.


You lie out on it Sir, and therefore it is not yours: for my part, I do not
lie in it; and yet it is mine


Thou do lie in it, to be in it and say it is thine: it is for the dead, not for
the quick, therefore thou lie


It Is a quick lie Sir, 'twill a way again from me to you.


What man do thou dig it for?


For no man Sir.


What woman then?


For none neither.


Who is to be buried in it?


One that was a woman Sir; but rest her Soul, she is dead.


How absolute the knave is? we must speak by the Card, or equivocation will
undo us: by the Lord Horatio, these three years I have taken note of it, the
Age is grown so picked, that the toe of the Pesant comes so near the heels
of our Courtier, he galls his Kibe. How long have thou been a Graue-maker


Of all the days in the year, I came to it that day that our last King Hamlet
over came Fortinbras


How long is that since?


Cannot you tell that? every fool can tell that: It was the very day, that
young Hamlet was borne, he that was mad, and sent into England


I marry, why was he sent into England?


Why, because he was mad; he shall recover his wits there; or if he do not,
it is no great matter there


Why?


'Twill not be seen in him, there the men are as mad as he.


How came he mad?


Very strangely they say.


How strangely?


Faith e'ene with loosing his wits.


Upon what ground?


Why here in Denmark: I have bin sixeteene here, man and Boy thirty years.


How long will a man lie 'i the earth ere he rot?


I faith, if he be not rotten before he die (as we have many pocky Coarses now
adays, that will scarce hold the laying in) he will last you some eight year,
or nine year. A Tanner will last you nine year


Why he, more then another?


Why sir, his hide is so tan'd with his Trade, that he will keep out water a
great while. And your water, is a sore Decayer of your horson dead body. Here Is
a Scull now: this Scul, has lain in the earth three and twenty years


Whose was it?


A whoreson mad Fellows it was;
Whose do you think it was?

Nay, I know not.


A pestlence on him for a mad Rogue, a pou'rd a Flaggon of Renish on my head
once. This same Scull Sir, this same Scull sir, was Yoricks Scull, the Kings
Iester


This?


E'ene that.


Let me see. Alas poor Yorick, I knew him Horatio, a fellow of infinite Jest;
of most excellent fancy, he has borne me on his back a thousand times: And
how abhorred my Imagination is, my gorge rises at it. Here hung those lips,
that I have kissed I know not how often. Where be your libes now? Your Gambals?
Your Songs? Your flashes of Merriment that were wont to set the Table on a
Rore? No one now to mock your own Ieering? Quite chopfalne? Now get you to my
Ladies Chamber, and tell her, let her paint an inch thick, to this favor she
must come. Make her laugh at that: prithee Horatio tell me one thing


What Is that my Lord?


Do thou think Alexander looked of this fashion in the earth?


E'ene so.


And smelt so? Puh.


E'ene so, my Lord.


To what base uses we may return Horatio. Why may not Imagination trace the
Noble dust of Alexander, till he find it stopping a bunghole


'Twere to consider: to curiously to consider so.


No faith, not a jot. But to follow him thither with modesty enough, and
likeliehood to lead it; as thus. Alexander died: Alexander was buried:
Alexander returns into dust; the dust is earth; of earth we make Lome, and
why of that Lome (whereto he was converted) might they not stopp a
Beere-barrell

Imperial Caesar, dead and turned to clay,
Might stop a hole to keep the wind away.
Oh, that that earth, which kept the world in awe,
Should patch a Wall, to expel the winters flaw.
But soft, but soft, aside; here comes the King.
The Queen, the Courtiers. Who is that they follow,
And with such maimed rites? This does betoken,
The Coarse they follow, did with disperate hand,
Fore do it own life; 'twas some Estate.
Couch we a while, and mark.

What Cerimony else?


That is Laertes, a very Noble youth: Mark.


What Cerimony else?


Her Obsequies have bin as far enlarged.
As we have warrantis, her death was doubtful,
And but that great Command, o're-swaies the order,
She should in ground unsanctified have lodged,
Till the last Trumpet. For charitable prayer,
Shardes, Flints, and Peebles, should be thrown on her:
Yet here she is allowed her Virgin Rites,
Her Maiden strewments, and the bringing home
Of Bell and Burial.

Must there no more be done?


No more be done:
We should profane the service of the dead,
To sing sage Requiem, and such rest to her
As to peace-parted Souls.

Lay her in the earth,
And from her fair and unpolluted flesh,
May Violets spring. I tell thee (churlish Priest)
A Ministering Angel shall my Sister be,
When thou lie howling?

What, the fair Ophelia?


Sweets, to the sweet farewell.
I hoped thou should have bin my Hamlets wife:
I thought thy Bride-bed to have decked (sweet Maid)
And not to have strewn thy Grave.

Oh terrible woer,
Fall ten times trebble, on that cursed head
Whose wicked deed* thy most Ingenious sense
Deprived thee of. Hold off the earth a while,
Till I have caught her once more in mine arms:
Now pile your dust, upon the quick, and dead,
Till of this flat a Mountain you have made,
To over top old Pelion, or the skyish head
Of blew Olympus.

What is he, whose griefs
Bears such an Emphasis? whose phrase of Sorrow
Conjure the wandering Stars, and makes them stand
Like wonder-wounded hearers? This is I,
Hamlet the Dane.

The devil take thy soul.


Thou prai'st not well,
I prithee take thy fingers from my throat;
Sir though I am not Spleenatiue, and rash,
Yet have I something in me dangerous,
Which let thy wisenesse fear. Away thy hand.

Pluck them asunder.


Hamlet, Hamlet.


Good my Lord be quiet.


Why I will fight with him upon this Theme.
Until my eielids will no longer wag.

Oh my Son, what Theme?


I loved Ophelia; forty thousand Brothers
Could not (with all there quantity of Love)
Make up my sum. What will thou do for her?

Oh he is mad Laertes,


For love of God forbear him.


Come show me what thou wilt do.
Woo't weep? Woo't fight? Woo't tear thy self?
Woo't drink up Esile, eat a Crocodile?
I Will do it. Do thou come here to whine;
To outface me with leaping in her Grave?
Be buried quick with her, and so will I.
And if thou prate of Mountains; let them throw
Millions of Akers on us; till our ground
Sindging his pate against the burning Zone,
Make Ossa like a wart. Nay, and thou wilt mouth,
I Will rant as well as thou.

This is mere Madness:
And thus awhile the fit will work on him:
Anon as patient as the female Dove,
When that her golden Cuplet are disclosed;
His silence will sit drooping.

Hear you Sir:
What is the reason that you use me thus?
I loud you ever; but it is no matter:
Let Hercules himself do what he may,
The Cat will Mew, and Dog will have his day.

I pray you good Horatio wait upon him,
Strengthen you patience in our last nights speech,
We Will put the matter to the present push:
Good Gertrude set some watch over your Son,
This Grave shall have a living Monument:
An hour of quiet shortly shall we see;
Till then, in patience our proceeding be.

So much for this Sir; now let me see the other,
You do remember all the Circumstance.

Remember it my Lord?


Sir, in my heart there was a kind of fighting,
That would not let me sleep; me thought I lay
Worse then the mutines in the Bilboes, rashly,
(And praise be rashness for it) let us know,
Our indiscretion sometimes serves us well,
When our dear plots do paul, and that should teach us,
There Is a Divinity that shapes our ends,
Rough-hew them how we will.

That is most certain.


Up from my Cabin
My sea-gowne scarft about me in the dark,
Grop'd I to find out them; had my desire,
Fingered their Packet, and in fine, withdrew
To mine own room again, making so bold,
(My fears forgetting manners) to unseal
Their grand Commission, where I found Horatio,
Oh royal knavery: An exact command,
Larded with many several sorts of reason;
Importing Denmarks health, and Englands too,
With hoo, such Bugges and Goblins in my life,
That on the superuize no leisure bated,
No not to stay the grinding of the Axe,
My head shoud be struck off.

Is It possible?


Here Is the Commission, read it at more leisure:
But will thou hear me how I did proceed?

I beseech you.


Being thus benetted round with Villains,
Ere I could make a Prologue to my brains,
They had begun the Play. I sat me down,
Devised a new Commission, wrote it fair,
I once did hold it as our Statists do,
A baseness to write fair; and labored much
How to forget that learning: but Sir now,
It did me Yeomans service: will thou know
The effects of what I wrote?

I, good my Lord.


An earnest Coniuration from the King,
As England was his faithful Tributary,
As love between them, as the Palm should flourish,
As Peace should still her wheaten Garland wear,
And stand a Comma 'tweene their amities,
And many such like Assis of great charge,
That on the view and know of these Contents,
Without debatement further, more or less,
He should the bearers put to sudden death,
Not shriuing time allowed.

How was this sealed?


Why, even in that was Heaven ordinate;
I had my fathers Signet in my Purse,
Which was the Model of that Danish Seal:
Folded the Writ up in form of the other,
Subscribed it, gau't the impression, placed it safely,
The changeling never known: Now, the next day
Was our Sea Fight, and what to this was sement,
Thou know already.

So Guildensterne and Rosincrance, go to it.


Why man, they did make love to this employment
They are not near my Conscience; their debate
Does by their own insinuation grow:
It Is dangerous, when the baser nature comes
Between the pass, and fell incensed points
Of mighty opposites.

Why, what a King is this?


Does it not, think thee, stand me now upon
He that has killed my King, and whor'd my Mother,
Popt in between the election and my hopes,
Thrown out his Angle for my proper life,
And with such coozenage; is it not perfect conscience,
To quit him with this arm? And is it not to be damned
To let this Canker of our nature come
In further evil.

It must be shortly known to him from England
What is the issue of the business there.

It will be short,
The interim's mine, and a man's life's no more
Then to say one: but I am very sorry good Horatio,
That to Laertes I forgot my self;
For by the image of my Cause, I see
The Portraiture of his; I Will count his favors:
But sure the bravery of his grief did put me
Into a Towering passion.

Peace, who comes here?


Your Lordship is right welcome back to Denmark.


I humbly thank you Sir, do know this waterflie?


No my good Lord.


Thy state is the more gracious; for it is a vice to know him: he has much
Land, and fertile; let a Beast be Lord of Beasts, and his Crib shall stand at
the Kings Mess; it is a Chowgh; but as I saw spacious in the possession of dirt


Sweet Lord, if your friendship were at leisure,
I should impart a thing to you from his Majesty.

I will receive it with all diligence of spirit; put your Bonet to his right
use, it is for the head


I thank your Lordship, it is very hot.


No, believe me it is very cold, the wind is Northerly.


It is indifferent cold my Lord indeed.


Me thinks it is very soultry, and hot for my Complexion.


Exceedingly, my Lord, it is very soultry, as 'twere I cannot tell how: but my
Lord, his Majesty bad me signify to you, that he has laid a great wager on
your head: Sir, this is the matter


I beseech you remember.


Nay, in good faith, for mine ease in good faith: Sir, you are not ignorant of
what excellence Laertes is at his weapon


What Is his weapon?


Rapier and dagger.


That Is two of his weapons; but well.


The sir King has waged with him six Barbary Horses, against the which he
impon'd as I take it, six French Rapiers and Poniards, with their assigns, as
Girdle, Hangers or so: three of the Carriages infaith are very dear to fancy,
very responsiue to the hilts, most delicate carriages, and of very liberal
conceit


What call you the Carriages?


The Carriages Sir, are the hangers.


The phrase would be more German to the matter: If we could carry Cannon by
our sides; I would it might be Hangers till then; but on six Barbary Horses
against six French Swords: their Assigns, and three liberal conceited
Carriages, that is the French but against the Danish; why is this impon'd as you
call it


The King Sir, has laid that in a dozen passes between you and him, he shall
not exceed you three hits; He has one twelve for mine, and that would come to
imediate trial, if your Lordship would vouchsafe the Answer


How if I answer no?


I mean my Lord, the opposition of your person in trial.


Sir, I will walk here in the Hall; if it please his Majesty, it is the
breathing time of day with me; let the Foyles be brought, the Gentleman
willing, and the King hold his purpose; I will win for him if I can: if not,
I Will gain nothing but my shame, and the odd hits


Shall I redeliuer you even so?


To this effect Sir, after what flourish your nature will.


I commend my duty to your Lordship.


Yours, yours; he does well to commend it himself, there are no tongues else
for's tongue


This Lapwing runs away with the shell on his head.


He did Complie with his Dugge before he sucked it: thus had he and mine more
of the same Beauy that I know the drossie age dotes on; only got the tune of
the time, and outward habit of encounter, a kind of yesty collection, which
carries them through and through the most fond and winnowed opinions; and do
but blow them to their trials: the Bubbles are out


You will lose this wager, my Lord.


I do not think so, since he went into France, I have been in continual
practice; I shall win at the odds: but thou would not think how all
here about my heart: but it is no matter


Nay, good my Lord.


It is but foolery; but it is such a kind of gain-giuing as would perhaps
trouble a woman


If your mind dislike any thing, obey. I will forestall their repair hither,
and say you are not fit


Not a whit, we defy Augury; there is a special Providence in the fall of a
sparrow. If it be now, it is not to come: if it be not to come, it will be
now: if it be not now; yet it will come; the readiness is all, since no man
has ought of what he leaves. What is it to leave betimes


Come Hamlet, come, and take this hand from me.


Give me your pardon Sir, I Have done you wrong,
But pardon't as you are a Gentleman.
This presence knows,
And you must needs have heard how I am punished
With sore distraction? What I have done
That might your nature honor, and exception
Roughly awake, I here proclaim was madness:
Was^t Hamlet wronged Laertes? Never Hamlet.
If Hamlet from himself be taken away:
And when he is not himself, does wrong Laertes,
Then Hamlet does it not, Hamlet denies it:
Who does it then? His Madness? If It be so,
Hamlet is of the Faction that is wronged,
His madness is poor Hamlets Enemy.
Sir, in this Audience,
Let my disclaiming from a purposed evil,
Free me so far in your most generous thoughts,
That I have shot mine Arrow over the house,
And hurt my Mother.

I am satisfied in Nature,
Whose motive in this case should stir me most
To my Revenge. But in my terms of Honor
I stand aloof, and will no reconcilement,
Till by some elder Masters of known Honor,
I have a voice, and president of peace
To keep my name vngorg'd. But till that time,
I do receive your offered love like love,
And will not wrong it.

I do embrace it freely,
And will this Brothers wager frankely play.
Give us the Foyles: Come on.

Come one for me.


I Will be your foil Laertes, in mine ignorance,
Your Skill shall like a Star in the darkest night,
Stick fiery off indeed.

You mock me Sir.


No by this hand.


Give them the Foyles young Osricke,
Cosen Hamlet, you know the wagot.

Very well my Lord,
Your Grace has laid the odds a' the weaker side.

I do not fear it,
I have seen you both:
But since he is bettered, we have therefore odds.

This is too heavy,
Let me see another.

This likes me well,
These Foyles have all a length.

I my good Lord.


Set me the Stopes of wine upon that Table:
If Hamlet give the first, or second hit,
Or quit in answer of the third exchange,
Let all the Battlements their Ordinance fire,
The King shall drink to Hamlets better breath,
And in the Cup an union shall he throw
Richer then that, which four successiue Kings
In Denmarkes Crown have worn.
Give me the Cups,
And let the Kettle to the Trumpets speak,
The Trumpet to the Cannoneer without,
The Cannons to the Heavens, the Heaven to Earth,
Now the King drinks to Hamlet. Come, begin,
And you the Judges bear a wary eye.

Come on sir.


Come on sir.


One.


No.


Judgment.


A hit, a very palpable hit.


Well: again.


Stay, give me drink.
Hamlet, this Pearl is thine,
Here Is to thy health. Give him the cup,

I Will play this bout first, set by awhile.
Come: Another hit; what say you?

A touch, a touch, I do confess.


Our Son shall win.


He Is fat, and scant of breath.
Here Is a Napkin, rub thy brows,
The Queen Carowses to thy fortune, Hamlet.

Good Madam.


Gertrude, do not drink.


I will my Lord;
I pray you pardon me.

It is the poisoned Cup, it is too late.


I dare not drink yet Madam,
By and by.

Come, let me wipe thy face.


My Lord, I Will hit him now.


I do not thinke't.


And yet it is almost against my conscience.


Come for the third.
Laertes, you but daily,
I pray you pass with your best violence,
I am affear'd you make a wanton of me.

Say you so? Come on.


Nothing neither way.


Have at you now.


Part them, they are incensed.


Nay come, again.


Look to the Queen there hoa.


They bleed on both sides. How is it my Lord?

How is it Laertes?


Why as a Woodcocke
To mine Sprindge, Osricke,
I am justly killed with mine own Treachery.

How does the Queen?


She sounds to see them bleed.


No, no, the drink, the drink.
Oh my dear Hamlet, the drink, the drink,
I am poisoned.

Oh Villainy! How? Let the door be locked.
Treachery, seek it out.

It is here Hamlet.
Hamlet, thou art slain,
No Medicine in the world can do thee good.
In thee, there is not half an hour of life;
The Treacherous Instrument is in thy hand.
Vnbated and envenomed: the foul practice
Has turned it self on me. Lo, here I lie,
Never to rise again: Thy Mothers poisoned:
I can no more, the King, the King's too blame.

The point envenomed too,
Then venom to thy work.

Treason, Treason.


O yet defend me Friends, I am but hurt.


Here thou incestuous, murdrous,
Damned Dane,
Drink off this Potion: Is thy Union here?
Follow my Mother.

He is ^ustly served.
It is a poison temp'red by himself:
Exchange forgiveness with me, Noble Hamlet;
Mine and my Fathers death come not upon thee,
Nor thine on me.

Heaven make thee free of it, I follow thee.
I am dead Horatio, wretched Queen adieu,
You that look pale, and tremble at this chance,
That are but Mutes or audience to this act:
Had I but time (as this fell Sergeant death
Is strick'd in his Arrest) oh I could tell you.
But let it be: Horatio, I am dead,
Thou live, report me and my causes right.
To the unsatisfied.

Never believe it.
I am more an Antike Roman then a Dane:
Here Is yet some Liquor left.

As the art a man, give me the Cup.
Let go, by Heaven I Will haue't.
Oh good Horatio, what a wounded name,
(Things standing thus unknown) shall live behind me.
If thou did ever hold me in thy heart,
Absent thee from felicity awhile,
And in this harsh world draw thy breath in pain,
To tell my Story.
What warlike noise is this?

Young Fortinbras, with conquest come from Poland
To the Ambassadors of England gives this warlike volly.

O I dye Horatio:
The potent poison quite ore-crowes my spirit,
I cannot live to hear the News from England,
But I do prophecy the election lights
On Fortinbras, he has my dying voice,
So tell him with the occurrents more and less,
Which have solicited. The rest is silence.

Now crack a Noble heart:
Goodnight sweet Prince,
And flights of Angels sing thee to thy rest,
Why does the Drum come hither?

Where is this sight?


What is it ye would see;
If ought of woe, or wonder, cease your search.

His quarry cries on havoc. Oh proud death,
What feast is toward in thine eternal Cell.
That thou so many Princes, at a shoot,
So bloodily have struck.

The sight is dismal,
And our affairs from England come too late,
The ears are senseless that should give us hearing,
To tell him his command'ment is fulfilled,
That Rosincrance and Guildensterne are dead:
Where should we have our thanks?

Not from his mouth,
Had it the ability of life to thank you:
He never gave command'ment for their death.
But since so iumpe upon this bloody question,
You from the Polake wars, and you from England
Are here arrived. Give order that these bodies
High on a stage be placed to the view,
And let me speak to the yet unknowing world,
How these things came about. So shall you hear
Of carnal, bloody, and unnatural acts,
Of accidental judgments, casual slaughters
Of death's put on by cunning, and forced cause,
And in this vpshot, purposes mistook,
Fallen on the Inuentors heads. All this can I
Truly deliver.

Let us have to hear it,
And call the Noblest to the Audience.
For me, with sorrow, I embrace my Fortune,
I have some Rites of memory in this Kingdom,
Which are to claim, my vantage does
Inuit me,

Of that I shall have always cause to speak,
And from his mouth
Whose voice will draw on more:
But let this same be presently performed,
Even whiles men's minds are wild,
Lest more mischance
On plots, and errors happen.

Let four Captains
Bear Hamlet like a Soldier to the Stage,
For he was likely, had he been put on
To have proved most royally:
And for his passage,
The Soldiers Music, and the rites of War
Speak lowdly for him.
Take up the body; Such a sight as this
Becomes the Field, but here shows much amiss.
Go, bid the Soldiers shoot.


