O For a Muse of Fire, that would ascend
The brightest Heaven of Invention:
A Kingdom for a Stage, Princes to Act,
And Monarchs to behold the swelling Scene.
Then should the Warlike Harry, like himself,
Assume the Port of Mars, and at his heels
(Leasht in, like Hounds) should Famine, Sword, and Fire
Crouch for employment. But pardon, Gentles all:
The flat vnraysed Spirits, that has dared,
On this unworthy Scaffold, to bring forth
So great an Object. Can this Cockpit hold
The vastie fields of France? Or may we cramme
Within this Wooden O, the very Caskes
That did affright the Air at Agincourt?
O pardon: since a crocked Figure may
Attest in little place a Million,
And let us, Ciphers to this great Account,
On your imaginary Forces work.
Suppose within the Girdle of these Walls
Are now confined two mighty Monarchies,
Whose high, vp-reared, and abutting Fronts,
The perilous narrow Ocean parts asunder.
Piece out our imperfections with your thoughts:
Into a thousand parts divide one Man,
And make imaginary Puissance.
Think when we talk of Horses, that you see them,
Printing their proud Hoofes in the receiving Earth:
For it is your thoughts that now must deck our Kings,
Carry them here and there: Iumping over Times;
Turning the accomplishment of many years
Into an Howre-glasse: for the which supply,
Admit me Chorus to this History;
Who Prologue-like, your humble patience pray,
Gently to hear, kindly to judge our Play.
MY Lord, I Will tell you, that self Bill is urged,
Which in the eleue^th year of ye last Kings reign
Was like, and had indeed against us past,
But that the scambling and unquiet time
Did push it out of farther question.

But how my Lord shall we resist is now?


It must be thought on: if it pass against us,
We loose the better half of our Possession:
For all the Temporal Lands, which men devout
By Testament have given to the Church,
Would they strip from us; being valued thus,
As much as would maintain, to the Kings honor,
Full fifteen Earls, and fifteen hundred Knights,
Six thousand and two hundred good Esquires:
And to relief of Lazars, and weak age
Of indigent faint Souls, past corporal toil,
A hundred Almes-houses, right well supplied:
And to the Coffers of the King beside,
A thousand pounds by the year. Thus runs the Bill.

This would drink deep.


'Twould drink the Cup and all.


But what prevention?


The King is full of grace, and fair regard.


And a true lover of the holy Church.


The courses of his youth promised it not.
The breath no sooner left his Fathers body,
But that his wildness, mortified in him,
Seemed to dye too: yea, at that very moment,
Consideration like an Angel came,
And whipped the offending Adam out of him;
Leaving his body as a Paradise,
TO inuelop and contain Celestial Spirits.
Never was such a sudden Scholar made:
Never came Reformation in a Flood,
With such a heady currance scowring faults:
Nor never Hidra-headed Wilfulness
So soon did loose his Seat; and all at once;
As in this King.

We are blessed in the Change.


Hear him but reason in Divinity;
And all-admiring, with an inward wish
You would desire the King were made a Prelate:
Hear him debate of Commonwealth Affairs;
You would say, it has been all in all his study:
List his discourse of War; and you shall hear
A fearful Battle rendered you in Music.
Turn him to any Cause of Policy,
The Gordian Knot of it he will unloose,
Familiar as his Garter: that when he speaks,
The Air, a Charter'd Libertine, is still,
And the mute Wonder lurketh in men's ears,
To steal his sweet and honyed Sentences:
So that the Art and Practique part of Life,
Must be the Mistress to this Theorique.
Which is a wonder how his Grace should gleane it,
Since his addiction was to Cour^e, vain,
His Companies vnletter'd, rude, and shallow,
His Hours filled up with Ryots Banq^ets, Sports;
And never noted in him any study,
Any retyrement, any sequestration,
From open Haunts and Popularitie.

The Strawberry grows underneath the Nettle,
And wholesome Berryes thrive and ripen best,
Neighbored by Fruit of baser quality:
And so the Prince obscured his Contemplation
Under the V^yle of Wildness, which (no doubt)
Grew like the Summer Grass* fastest by Night,
Unseen, yet cressiue in his faculty.

It must be so: for Miracles are ceast:
And therefore we must needs admit the means,
How things are perfected.

But my good Lord:
How now for mittigation of this Bill,
Urged by the Commons? does his Majesty
Incline to it, or no?

He seems indifferent:
Or rather swaying more upon our part,
Then cherishing the exhibiters against us*
For I have made an offer to his Majesty,
Upon our Spiritual Convocation,
And in regard of Causes now in hand,
Which I have opened to his Grace at large,
As touching France, to give a greater Sum,
Then ever at one time the Clergy yet
Did to his Predecessors part withal.

How did this offer seem received, my Lord?


With good acceptance of his Majesty:
Save that there was not time enough to hear,
As I perceived his Grace would saine have done,
The seueralls and vnhidden passage:
Of his true Titles to some certain Dukedomes,
And generally, to the Crown and Seat of France,
Derived from Edward his great Grandfather.

What was the impediment that broke this off?


The French Ambassador upon that instant
Craved audience; and the hour I think is come,
To give him hearing: Is it four a Clock?

It is.


Then go we in, to know his Embassy:
Which I could with a ready guess declare,
Before the Frenchman speak a word of it.

I Will wait upon you, and I long to hear it.


Where is my gracious Lord of Canterbury?


Not here in presence.


Send for him, good Uncle.


Shall we call in the Ambassador, my Liege?


Not yet, my Cousin: we would be resolved,
Before we hear him, of some things of weight,
That task our thoughts, concerning us and France.

God and his Angels guard your sacred Throne,
And make you long become it.

Sure we thank you.
My learned Lord, we pray you to proceed,
And justly and religiously unfold,
Why the Law Salike, that they have in France,
Or should or should not bar us in our Claim:
And God forbid, my dear and faithful Lord,
That you should fashion, wrest, or bow your reading,
Or nicely charge your understanding Soul,
With opening Titles miscreate, whose right
Suits not in native colors with the truth:
For God does know, how many now in health,
Shall drop their blood, in approbation
Of what your reverence shall incite us to.
Therefore take heed how you impawne our Person,
How you awake our sleeping Sword of War;
We charge you in the Name of God take heed:
For never two such Kingdoms did contend,
Without much fall of blood, whose guiltless drops
Are every one, a Woe, a sore Complaint,
Against him, whose wrongs gives edge unto the Swords,
That makes such waste in brief mortality.
Under this Coniuration, speak my Lord:
For we will hear, note, and believe in heart,
That what you speak, is in your Conscience washed,
As pure as sin with Baptism.

Then hear me gracious Soueraign, and you Peers,
That owe your selves, your lives, and services,
To this Imperial Throne. There is no bar
To make against your Highness Claim to France,
But this which they produce from Pharamond,
Interram Salicam Mulieres ne succedaul,
No Woman shall succeed in Salike Land:
Which Salike Land, the French unjustly gloze
To be the Realm of France, and Pharamond
The under of this Law, and Female Bar.
Yet their own Authors faithfully affirm,
That the Land Salike is in Germany,
Between the Clouds of Sala and of Elue:
Where Charles the Great having subdued the Saxons,
There left behind and settled certain French:
Who holding in disdain the German Women,
For some dishonest manners of their life,
Established then this Law; to wit, No Female
Should be Inheritrix in Salike Land:
Which Salike (as I said) 'twixt Elue and Sala,
Is at this day in Germany, called Meisen.
Then does it well appear, the Salike Law
Was not devised for the Realm of France:
Nor did the French possess the Salike, Land,
Until four hundred one and twenty years
After defunction of King Pharamond,
Idly supposed the founder of this Law,
Who died within the year of our Redemption,
Four hundred twenty six: and Charles the Great
Subdued the Saxons, and did seat the French
Beyond the River Sala, in the year
Eight hundred five. Besides, their Writers say,
King Pepin, which deposed Childerike,
Did as Heir General, being descended
Of Blithild, which was Daughter to King Clothair,
Make Claim and Title to the Crown of France.
Hugh Capet also, who usurped the Crown
Of Charles the Duke of Loraine, sole Heir male
Of the true Line and Stock of Charles the Great:
To find his Title with some shows of truth,
Though in pure truth it was corrupt and naught,
Conuey'd himself as the Heir to the Lady Lingare,
Daughter to Charlemaine, who was the Son
To Jews the Emperor, and Jews the Son
Of Charles the Great: also King Jews the Tenth,
Who was sole Heir to the Usurper Capet,
Could not keep quiet in his conscience,
Wearing the Crown of France, 'till satisfied,
That fair Queen Isabel, his Grandmother,
Was Lineall of the Lady Ermengare,
Daughter to Charles the foresaid Duke of Loraine:
By the which Marriage, the Line of Charles the Great
Was reunited to the Crown of France.
So, that as clear as is the Summers Sun,
King Pepins Title, and Hugh Capets Claim,
King Jews his satisfaction, all appear
To hold in Right and Title of the Female:
So do the Kings of France unto this day.
Howbeit, they would hold up this Salique Law,
To bar your Highness clayming from the Female,
And rather choose to hide them in a Net,
Then amply to imbarre their crooked Titles,
Usurped from you and your Progenitors.

May I with right and conscience make this claim?


The sin upon my head, dread Sovereign:
For in the Book of Numbers is it writ,
When the man dies, let the Inheritance
Descend unto the Daughter. Gracious Lord,
Stand for your own, unwind your bloody Flagge,
Look back into your mighty Ancestors:
Go my dread Lord, to your great Grandsires Tomb,
From whom you claim; inuoke his Warlike Spirit,
And your Great Uncles, Edward the Black Prince,
Who on the French ground played a Tragedy,
Making defeat on the full Power of France:
Whiles his most mighty Father on a Hill
Stood smiling, to behold his Lions Whelpe
Forage in blood of French Nobility.
O Noble English, that could entertain
With half their Forces, the full pride of France,
And let another half stand laughing by,
All out of work, and cold for action.

Awake remembrance of these valiant dead,
And with your puissant Arm renew their Feats;
You are their Heir, you sit upon their Throne:
The Blood and Courage that renowned them,
Runs in your Veins: and my thrice-puissant Liege
Is in the very May-Morne of his Youth,
Ripe for Exploits and mighty Enterprises.

Your Brother Kings and Monarchs of the Earth
Do all expect, that you should rowse your self,
As did the former Lions of your Blood.

They know your Grace has cause, and means, and might;
So has your Highness: never King of England
Had Nobles richer, and more loyal Subjects,
Whose hearts have left their bodies here in England,
And lie pauillion'd in the fields of France.

O let their bodies follow my dear Liege
With Bloods, and Sword and Fire, to win your Right:
In aid whereof, we of the Spirituality
Will raise your Highness such a mighty Sum,
As never did the Clergy at one time
Bring in to any of your Ancestors.

We must not only arm to invade the French,
But lay down our proportions, to defend
Against the Scot, who will make road upon us,
With all advantages.

They of those Marches, gracious Soueraign,
Shall be a Wall sufficient to defend
Our inland from the pilfering Borderers.

We do not mean the coursing snatchers only,
But fear the maine intendment of the Scot,
Who has been still a giddy neighbor to us:
For you shall read, that my great Grandfather
Never went with his forces into France,
But that the Scot, on his unfurnished Kingdom,
Came pouring like the Tide into a breach,
With ample and brim fullness of his force,
Galling the gleaned Land with hot Assayes,
Girding with grievous siege, Castles and Towns:
That England being empty of defense,
Has shook and trembled at the ill neighborhood.

She has bin the^ more feared the^ harmed, my Liege:
For hear her but exampl'd by her self,
When all her Cheualrie has been in France,
And she a mourning Widow of her Nobles,
She has her self not only well defended,
But taken and impounded as a Stray,
The King of Scots: whom she did send to France,
To fill King Edwards fame with prisoner Kings,
And make their Chronicle as rich with praise,
As is the Owse and bottom of the Sea
With sunken Wrack, and sum-lesse Treasuries.

But there is a saying very old and true,
If that you will France win, then with Scotland first begin.
For once the Eagle (England) being in prey,
To her unguarded Nest, the Weazell (Scot)
Comes sneaking, and so sucks her Princely Eggs,
Playing the Mouse in absence of the Cat,
To tame and havoc more then she can eat.

It follows then, the Cat must stay at home,
Yet that is but a crushed necessity,
Since we have locks to safeguard necessaries,
And pretty traps to catch the petty thieves.
While that the Armed hand does fight abroad,
The advised head defends it self at home:
For Government, though high, and low, and lower,
Put into parts, does keep in one consent,
Congreeing in a full and natural close,
Like Music.

Therefore does heaven divide
The state of man in diverse functions,
Setting endeavor in continual motion:
To which is fixed as an aim or butt,
Obedience: for so work the Honey Bees,
Creatures that by a rule in Nature teach
The Act of Order to a peopled Kingdom*
They have a King, and Officers of sorts,
Where some like Magistrates correct at home:
Others, like Merchants venture Trade abroad;
Others, like Soldiers armed in their stings,
Make boot upon the Summer, Velvet buddes:
Which pillage, they with merry march bring home
To the Tent-royal of their Emperor:
Who busied in his Majesty's surueyes
The singing Masons building roofes of Gold,
The civil Citizens kneading up the honey;
The poor Mechanicke Porters, crowding in
Their heavy burdens at his narrow gate:
The sad-ey'd Justice with his surly humme,
Delivering ore to Executors pale
The lazy yawning Drone: I this infer,
That many things having full reference
To one consent, may work contrariously,
As many Arrows loosed several ways
Come to one mark: as many ways meet in one town,
As many fresh streams meet in one salt sea;
As many Lines close in the Dials center:
So may a thousand actions once a foot,
And in one purpose, and be all well borne
Without defeat. Therefore to France, my Liege,
Divide your happy England into four,
Whereof, take you one quarter into France,
And you withal shall make all Gallia shake.
If we with thrice such powers left at home,
Cannot defend our own doors from the dog,
Let us be worried, and our Nation lose
The name of hardiness and policy.

Call in the Messengers sent from the Dolphin.
Now are we well resolved, and by Gods help
And yours, the noble sinews of our power,
France being ours, we will bend it to our Awe,
Or break it all to pieces. Or there we will sit,
(Ruling in large and ample Emperie,
Ore France, and all her (almost) Kingly Dukedomes)
Or lay these bones in an unworthy Vrne,
Tomblesse, with no remembrance over them:
Either our History shall with full mouth
Speak freely of our Acts, or else our grave
Like Turkish mute shall have a tonguelesse mouth,
Not worshipped with a waxen Epitaph.
Now are we well prepared to know the pleasure
Of our fair Cousin Dolphin: for we hear,
Your greeting is from him, not from the King.

May't please your Majesty to give us leave
Freely to render what we have in charge:
Or shall we sparingly show you far off
The Dolphins meaning, and our Embassy.

We are no Tyrant, but a Christian King,
Unto whose grace our passion is as subject
As is our wretches fettred in our prisons,
Therefore with frank and with vncurbed plainness,
Tell us the Dolphins mind.

Thus than in few:
Your Highness lately sending into France,
Did claim some certain Dukedomes, in the right
Of your great Predecessor, King Edward the third.
In answer of which claim, the Prince our Master
Says, that you savor too much of your youth,
And bids you be advised: There Is naught in France,
That can be with a nimble Galliard won:
You cannot revel into Dukedomes there.
He therefore sends you meeter for your spirit
This Tun of Treasure; and in lieu of this,
Desires you let the dukedomes that you claim
Hear no more of you. This the Dolphin speaks.

What Treasure Uncle?


Tennis balls, my Liege.


We are glad the Dolphin is so pleasant with us,
His Present, and your pains we thank you for:
When we have matched our Rackets to these Balls,
We will in France (by Gods grace) play a set,
Shall strike his fathers Crown into the hazard.
Tell him, he has made a match with such a Wrangler,
That all the Courts of France will be disturbed
With Chaces. And we understand him well,
How he comes over us with our wilder days,
Not measuring what use we made of them.
We never valew'd this poor seat of England,
And therefore living hence, did give our self
To barbarous license: As it is ever common,
That men are merriest, when they are from home.
But tell the Dolphin, I will keep my State,
Be like a King, and show my sail of Greatness,
When I do rowse me in my Throne of France.
For that I have laid by my Majesty,
And plodded like a man for working days:
But I will rise there with so full a glory,
That I will dazzle all the eyes of France,
Yea strike the Dolphin blind to look on us,
And tell the pleasant Prince, this Mock of his
Has turned his balls to Gun-stones, and his soul
Shall stand sore charged, for the wastefull vengeance
That shall fly with them: for many a thousand widows
Shall this his Mock, mock out of their deer husbands;
Mock mothers from their sons, mock Castles down:
And some are yet vngotten and unborn,
That shall have cause to curse the Dolphins scorn.
But this lies all within the will of God,
To whom I do appeal, and in whose name
Tell you the Dolphin, I am coming on,
To venge me as I may, and to put forth
My rightful hand in a wel-hallow'd cause.
So get you hence in peace: And tell the Dolphin.
His Jest will savor but of shallow wit,
When thousands weep more then did laugh at it,
Convey them with safe conduct. Fare you well.

This was a merry Message.


We hope to make the Sender blush at it:
Therefore, my Lords, omit no happy hour,
That may give furth'rance to our Expedition:
For we have now no thought in us but France,
Save those to God, that run before our business.
Therefore let our proportions for these Wars
Be soon collected, and all things thought upon,
That may with reasonable swiftness add
More Feathers to our Wings: for God before,
We Will chide this Dolphin at his fathers door.
Therefore let every man now task his thought,
That this fair Action may on foot be brought.

Now all the Youth of England are on fire,
And silken Dalliance in the Wardrobe lies:
Now thrive the Armorers, and Honors thought
Reigns solely in the breast of every man.
They sell the Pasture now, to buy the Horse;
Following the Mirror of all Christian Kings,
With winged heels, as English Mercuries.
For now sits Expectation in the Air,
And hides a Sword, from Hilts unto the Point,
With Crowns Imperial, Crowns and Coronets*
Promised to Harry, and his followers.
The French advised by good intelligence
Of this most dreadful preparation,
Shake in their fear, and with pale Policy
Seek to divert the English purposes.
O England: Model to thy inward Greatness,
Like little Body with a mighty Heart:
What might thou do, that honor would thee do,
Were all thy children kind and natural:
But see, thy fault France has in thee found out,
A nest of hollow bosoms, which he filles
With treacherous Crowns, and three corrupted men:
One, Richard Earl of Cambridge, and the second
Henry Lord Scroope of Masham, and the third
Sir Thomas Gray Knight of Northumberland,
Have for the Gilt of France (O guilt indeed)
Confirmed Conspiracy with fearful France,
And by their hands, this grace of Kings must dye.
If Hell and Treason hold their promises,
Ere he take ship for France; and in Southampton.
Linger your patience on, and we will digest
The abuse of distance; force a play:
The sum is paid, the Traitors are agreed,
The King is set from London, and the Scene
Is now transported (Gentles) to Southampton,
There is the Playhouse now, there must you sit,
And thence to France shall we convey you safe,
And bring you back: Charming the narrow seas
To give you gentle Pass: for if we may,
We Will not offend one stomach with our Play.
But till the King come forth, and not till then,
Unto Southampton do we shift our Scene.

Well met Corporal Nym.


Good morrow Lieutenant Bardolfe.


What, are Ancient Pistol and you friends yet?


For my part, I care not: I say little: but when time shall serve, there shall
be smiles, but that shall be as it may. I dare not fight, but I will wink and
hold out mine iron: it is a simple one, but what though? It will toste Cheese,
and it will endure cold, as another man's sword will: and there is an end


I will bestow a breakfast to make you friends, and we will be all three sworn
brothers to France: Let't be so good Corporal Nym


Faith, I will live so long as I may, that is the certain of it: and when I
cannot live any longer, I will do as I may: That is my rest, that is the
rendeuous of it


It is certain Corporal, that he is married to Nell Quickly, and certainly
she did you wrong, for you were troth-plight to her


I cannot tell, Things must be as they may: men may sleep, and they may have
their throats about them at that time, and some say, knives have edges: It must
be as it may, though patience be a tired name, yet she will plodde, there must
be Conclusions, well, I cannot tell


Here comes Ancient Pistol and his wife: good Corporal be patient here. How
now mine Hoaste Pistol


Base Tyke, cal'st thou me Host, now by this hand I swear I scorn the
term: nor shall my Nel keep Lodgers


No by my troth, not long: For we cannot lodge and board a dozen or fourteen
Gentlewomen that live honestly by the prick of their Needles, but it will be
thought we keep a Bawdy House straight. O welliday Lady, if he be not hewne
now, we shall see wilful adultery and murder committed


Good Lieutenant, good Corporal offer nothing here.


Pish.


Pish for thee, Island dog: thou prickeard cur of Island.


Good Corporal Nym show thy valor, and put up your sword.


Will you shogge off? I would have you solus.


Solus, egregious dog? O Viper vile; The solus in thy most marvelous face, the
solus in thy teeth, and in thy throat, and in thy hateful Lungs, yea in thy
Maw perdy; and which is worse, within thy nastie mouth. I do retort the solus
in thy bowels, for I can take, and Pistols cock is up, and flashing fire will
follow


I am not Barbason, you cannot conjure me: I have an humor to knock you
indifferently well: If you grow foul with me Pistol, I will scour you with
my Rapier, as I may, in fair terms. If you would walk off, I would prick
your guts a little in good terms, as I may, and that is the humor of it


O Braggard vile, and damned furious wight,
The Grave does gape, and doting death is near,
Therefore exhale.

Hear me, hear me what I say: He that strikes the first stroke, I Will run him
up to the hilts, as I am a soldier


An oath of mickle might, and fury shall abate.
Give me thy fist, thy fore-foote to me give: Thy spirits are most tall.

I will cut thy throat one time or other in fair terms, that is the humor of
it


Couple a gorge, that is the word. I defy thee again. O hound of Creet,
think thou my spouse to get? No, to the spittle go, and from the Poudring
tub of infamy, fetch forth the Lazar Kite of Cressids kind, Doll Teare-sheete,
she by name, and her espouse. I have, and I will hold the Quondam Quickly for
the only she: and Pauca, there is enough to go to


Mine Host Pistol, you must come to my Master, and your Hostess: He is very
sick, and would to bed. Good Bardolfe, put thy face between his sheets, and
do the Office of a Warming-pan: Faith, he is very ill


Away you Rogue.


By my troth he will yield the Crow a pudding one of these days: the King has
killed his heart. Good Husband come home presently


Come, shall I make you two friends. We must to France together: why the devil
should we keep knives to cut one another throats


Let stoods ore-swell, and fiends for food howl on.


You Will pay me the eight shillings I won of you at Betting?


Base is the Slave that pays.


That now I will have: that is the humor of it.


As manhood shall compound: push home.


By this sword, he that makes the first thrust,
I Will kill him: By this sword, I will.

Sword is an Oath, and Oaths must have their course


Coporall Nym, and thou will be friends be friends, and thou will not, why then
be enemies with me to: prithee put up


A Noble shall thou have, and present pay, and Liquor likewise will I give to
thee, and friendship shall combyne, and brotherhood. I Will live by Nymme, and
Nymme shall live by me, is not this just? For I shall Surler be unto the Camp,
and profits will accrue. Give me thy hand


I shall have my Noble?


In cash, most justly paid.


Well, then that the humor often.


As ever you come of women, come in quickly to sir John: A poor heart, he is
so shak'd of a burning quotidian Tertian, that it is most lamentable to behold.
Sweet men, come to him


The King has run bad humors on the Knight, that is the even of it.


Nym, thou have spoke the right, his heart is fracted and corroborate.


The King is a good King, but it must be as it may: he passes some humors, and
carreeres


Let us condole the Knight, for (Lambekins) we will live.


Fore God his Grace is bold to trust these traitors


They shall be apprehended by and by.


How smooth and even they do bear themselves,
As if allegiance in their bosoms sat
Crowned with faith, and constant loyalty.

The King has note of all that they intend,
By interception, which they dream not of.

Nay, but the man that was his bedfellow,
Whom he has dulled and cloyed with gracious favors;
That he should for a foreign purse, so sell
His Sovereigns life to death and treachery.

Now sits the wind fane, and we will aboard.
My Lord of Cambridge, and my kind Lord of Masham,
And you my gentle Knight, give me your thoughts:
Think you not that the powers we bear with us
Will cut their passage through the force of France?
Doing the execution, and the act,
For which we have in head assembled them.

No doubt my Liege, if each man do his best.


I doubt not that, since we are well persuaded
We carry not a heart with us from hence,
That grows not in a fair consent with ours:
Nor leave not one behind, that does not wish
Success and Conquest to attend on us.

Never was Monarch better feared and loved,
Then is your Majesty; there is not I think a subject
That sits in heart-greefe and vneasinesse
Under the sweet shade of your government.

True: those that were your Fathers enemies,
Have steeped their gauls in honey, and do serve you
With hearts create of duty, and of zeal.

We therefore have great cause of thankfulness,
And shall forget the office of our hand
Sooner then quittance of desert and merit,
According to the weight and worthiness.

So service shall with steeled sinews toil,
And labor shall refresh it self with hope
To do your Grace incestant services.

We Judge no less. Uncle of Exeter,
Enlarge the man committed yesterday,
That ^ayl'd against our person: We consider
It was excess of Wine that set him on,
And on his more advice, We pardon him,

That Is mercy, but too much security:
Let him be punished Sovereign, least example
Breed (by his sufferance) more of such a kind.

O let us yet be merciful.


So may your Highness, and yet punish too.


Sir, you show great mercy if you give him life,
After the taste of much correction.

Alas, your too much love and care of me,
Are heavy Orisons against this poor wretch:
If little faults proceeding on distemper,
Shall not be winked at, how shall we stretch our eye
When capital crimes, chewed, swallowed, and digested,
Appear before us? We Will yet enlarge that man,
Though Cambridge, Scroope, and Gray, in their dear care
And tender preservation of our person
Would have him punished* And now to our French causes,
Who are the late Commissioners?

I one my Lord,
Your Highness bad me ask for it to day.

So did you me my Liege.


And I my Royal Sovereign.


Then Richard Earl of Cambridge, there is yours:
There yours Lord Scroope of Masham, and Sir Knight:
Gray of Northumberland, this same is yours:
Read them, and know I know your worthiness.
My Lord of Westmerland, and Uncle Exeter,
We will aboard to night. Why how now Gentlemen?
What see you in those papers, that you loose
So much complexion? Look ye how they change:
Their cheeks are paper. Why, what read you there,
That have so cowarded and chased your blood
Out of appearance.

I do confess my fault,
And do submit me to your Highness mercy.

To which we all appeal.


The mercy that was quick in us but late,
By your own counsel is suppressed and killed:
You must not dare (for shame) to talk of mercy,
For your own reasons turn into your bosoms,
As dogs upon their masters, worrying you:
See you my Princes, and my Noble Peers,
These English monsters: My Lord of Cambridge here,
You know how apt our love was, to accord
To furnish with all appertinents
Belonging to his Honor; and this man,
Has for a few light Crowns, lightly conspired
And sworn unto the practices of France
To kill us here in Hampton. To the which,
This Knight no less for bounty bound to Us
Then Cambridge is, has likewise sworn. But O,
What shall I say to thee Lord Scroope, thou cruel,
Ungrateful, savage, and inhumane Creature?
Thou that did bear the key of all my counsels,
That knew'st the very bottom of my soul,
That (almost) might have coined me into Gold,
Would thou have practiced on me, for thy use?
May it be possible, that foreign hyer
Could out of thee extract one spark of evil
That might annoy my finger? It Is so strange,
That though the truth of it stands off as gross
As black and white, my eye will scarsely see it.
Treason, and murder, ever kept together,
As two yoke devils sworn to eythers purpose,
Working so grossly in an natural cause,
That admiration did not hoope at them.
But thou (against all proportion) did bring in
Wonder to wait on reason, and on murder:
And whatsoever cunning fiend it was
That wrought upon thee so preposterously,
Has got the voice in hell for excellence:
And other devils that suggest by treasons,
Do botch and bungle up damnation,
With patches, colors, and with forms being fetched
From glist'ring semblances of piety:
But he that tempered thee, bad thee stand up,
Gave thee no instance why thou should do treason,
Unless to dub thee with the name of Traitor.
If that same Demon that has gulled thee thus,
Should with his Lyon-gate walk the whole world,
He might return to vastie Tartar back,
And tell the Legions, I can never win
A soul so easy as that Englishmans.
Oh, how have thou with jealousy infected
The sweetness of affiance? Show men dutiful,
Why so did thou: seem they grave and learned?
Why so did thou. Come they of Noble Family?
Why so did thou. Seem they religious?
Why so did thou. Or are they spare in diet,
Free from gross passion, or of mirth, or anger,
Constant in spirit, not sweruing with the blood,
Garnished and decked in modest complement,
Not working with the eye, without the ear,
And but in purged judgment trusting neither,
Such and so finely boulted did thou seem:
And thus thy fall has left a kind of blot,
To make thee full fraught man, and best endued
With some suspicion, I will weep for thee.
For this revolt of thine, me thinks is like
Another fall of Man. Their faults are open,
Arrest them to the answer of the Law,
And God acquit them of their practices.

I arrest thee of High Treason, by the name of Richard Earl of Cambridge.
I arrest thee of High Treason, by the name of Thomas Lord Scroope of Marsham.
I arrest thee of High Treason, by the name of Thomas Gray, Knight of
Northumberland

Our purposes* God justly has discovered,
And I repent my fault more then my death,
Which I beseech your Highness to forgive,
Although my body pay the price of it.

For me, the Gold of France did not seduce,
Although I did admit it as a motive,
The sooner to effect what I intended:
But God be thanked for prevention,
Which in sufferance heartily will rejoice,
Beseeching God, and you, to pardon me.

Never did faithful subject more rejoice
At the discovery of most dangerous Treason,
Then I do at this hour joy ore my self,
Prevented from a damned enterprise;
My fault, but not my body, pardon Sovereign.

God quit you in his mercy: Hear your sentence
You have conspired against Our Royal person,
Joined with an enemy proclaimed, and from his Coffers,
Receyu'd the Golden Earnest of Our death:
Wherein you would have sold your King to slaughter,
His Princes, and his Peers to servitude,
His Subjects to oppression, and contempt,
And his whole Kingdom into desolation:
Touching our person, seek we no revenge,
But we our Kingdoms safety must so tender,
Whose ruin you sought, that to her Laws
We do deliver you. Get you therefore hence,
(Poor miserable wretches) to your death:
The taste whereof, God of his mercy give
You patience to endure, and true Repentance
Of all your dear offenses. Bear them hence.
Now Lords for France: the enterprise whereof
Shall be to you as us, like glorious.
We doubt not of a fair and luckie War,
Since God so graciously has brought to light
This dangerous Treason, lurking in our way,
To hinder our beginnings. We doubt not now,
But every Rub is smoothed on our way.
Then forth, dear Countrymen: Let us deliver
Our Puissance into the hand of God,
Putting it straight in expedition.
Chearely to Sea, the signs of War advance,
No King of England, if not King of France.

'Prythee honey sweet Husband, let me bring thee to Stains.


No: for my manly heart does erne. Bardolph, be blythe: Nim, rowse thy vaunting
Veins: Boy, brissle thy Courage up: for Falstaff he is dead, and we must
erne therefore


Would I were with him, wheresomere he is, either in Heaven, or in Hell.


Nay sure, he is not in Hell: he is in Arthurs Bosom, if ever man went to
Arthurs Bosom: a made a finer end, and went away and it had been any
Christome Child: a parted even just between Twelve and One, even at the
turning of the Tide: for after I saw him sumble with the Sheets, and play with
Flowers, and smile upon his fingers end, I knew there was but one way: for his
Nose was as sharp as a Pen, and a Table of green fields. How now Sir John
(quoth I?) what man? be a good cheer: so a cried out, God, God, God, three or
four times: now I, to comfort him, bid him a should not think of God; I hoped
there was no need to trouble himself with any such thoughts yet: so a bad me
lay more Clothes on his feet: I put my hand into the Bed, and felt them, and
they were as cold as any stone: then I felt to his knees, and so vp-peer'd, and
upward, and all was as cold as any stone


They say he cried out of Sack.


I, that a did.


And of Women.


Nay, that a did not.


Yes that a did, and said they were Deules incarnate.


A could never abide Carnation, 'twas a Color he never liked.


A said once, the Deule would have him about Women.


A did in some sort (indeed) handle Women: but then he was rumatique, and
talked of the Whore of Babylon


Do you not remember a saw a Flea stick upon Bardolphs Nose, and a said it
was a black Soul burning in Hell


Well, the fuel is gone that maintained that fire: that is all the Riches I got
in his service


Shall we shogg? the King will be gone from Southampton.


Come, let us away. My Love, give me thy Lips: Look to my Chattels, and my
Moueables: Let Senses rule: The world is, Pitch and pay: trust none: for Oaths
are Strawes, men's Faiths are Wafer-Cakes, and hold-fast is the only Dog: My
Ducke, therefore Caueto be thy Counsailor. Go, clear thy Chrystalls.
Yoke-fellowes in Arms, let us to France, like Horse-leeches my Boys, to
suck, to suck, the very blood to suck


And that is but unwholesome food, they say.


Touch her soft mouth, and march.


Farewell Hostess.


I cannot kiss, that is the humor of it: but adieu.


Let Huswiferie appear: keep close, I thee command.


Farewell: adieu.


Thus comes the English with full power upon us,
And more then carefully it us concerns,
To answer Royally in our defenses.
Therefore the Dukes of Berry and of Britain,
Of Brabant and of Orleance, shall make forth,
And you Prince Dolphin, with all swift dispatch
To line and new repair our Towns of War
With men of courage, and with means defendant:
For England his approaches makes as fierce,
As Waters to the sucking of a Gulf.
It fits us then to be as provident,
As fear may teach us, out of late examples
Left by the fatal and neglected English,
Upon our fields.

My most redoubted Father,
It is most meet we arm us against the Foe:
For Peace it self should not so dull a Kingdom,
(Though War nor no known Quarrel were in question)
But that Defenses, Musters, Preparations,
Should be maintained, assembled, and collected,
As were a War in expectation.
Therefore I say, it is meet we all go forth,
To view the sick and feeble parts of France:
And let us do it with no show of fear,
No, with no more, then if we heard that England
Were busied with a Whitson Morris-dance:
For, my good Liege, she is so idly King'd,
Her Scepter so phantastically borne,
By a vain giddie shallow humorous Youth,
That fear attends her not.

O peace, Prince Dolphin,
You are too much mistaken in this King:
Question your Grace the late Ambassadors,
With what great State he heard their Embassy,
How well supplied with Noble Counselors,
How modest in exception; and withal,
How terrible in constant resolution:
And you shall find, his Vanities fore-spent,
Were but the outside of the Roman Brutus,
Covering Discretion with a Coat of Folly;
As Gardeners do with Ordure hide those Roots
That shall first spring, and be most delicate.

Well, it is not so, my Lord High Constable.
But though we think it so, it is no matter:
In cases of defense, it is best to weigh
The Enemy more mighty then he seems,
So the proportions of defense are filled:
Which of a weak and niggardly proiection,
Does like a Miser spoil his Coat, with scanting
A little Cloth.

Think we King Harry strong:
And Princes, look you strongly arm to meet him.
The Kindred of him has been flesht upon us:
And he is bred out of that bloody strain,
That haunted us in our familiar Paths:
Witness our too much memorable shame,
When Cressy Battle fatally was struck,
And all our Princes captived, by the hand
Of that black Name, Edward, black Prince of Wales:
Whiles that his Mountain Sire, on Mountain standing
Up in the Air, crowned with the Golden Sun,
Saw his Heroical Seed, and smiled to see him
Mangle the Work of Nature, and deface
The Patterns, that by God and by French Fathers
Had twenty years been made. This is a Stem
Of that Victorious Stock: and let us fear
The Native mightiness and fate of him.

Ambassadors from Harry King of England,
Do crave admittance to your Majesty.

We Will give them present audience.
Go, and bring them.
You see this Chase is hotly followed, friends.

Turn head, and stop pursuit: for coward Dogs
Most spend their mouths, when what they seem to threaten
Runs far before them. Good my Sovereign
Take up the English short, and let them know
Of what a Monarchy you are the Head:
Self-love, my Liege, is not so vile a sin,
As selfe-neglecting.

From our Brother of England?


From him, and thus he greets your Majesty:
He wills you in the Name of God Almighty,
That you deuest your self, and lay apart
The borrowed Glories, that by gift of Heaven,
By Law of Nature, and of Nations, longs
To him and to his Heirs, namely, the Crown,
And all wide-stretched Honors, that pertain
By Custom, and the Ordinance of Times,
Unto the Crown of France: that you may know
It Is no sinister, nor no awk-ward Claim,
Picked from the worme-holes of long-vanisht days,
Nor from the dust of old Oblivion rakt,
He sends you this most memorable Line,
In every Branch truly demonstratiue;
Willing you ouer-looke this Pedigree:
And when you find him euenly derived
From his most famed, of famous Ancestors,
Edward the third; he bids you then resign
Your Crown and Kingdom, indirectly held
From him, the Native and true Challenger.

Or else what follows?


Bloody constraint: for if you hide the Crown
Even in your hearts, there will he rake for it.
Therefore in fierce Tempest is he coming,
In Thunder and in Earthquake, like a Jove:
That if requiring fail, he will compel.
And bids you, in the Bowels of the Lord,
Deliver up the Crown, and to take mercy
On the poor Souls, for whom this hungry War
Opens his vastie Jaws: and on your head
Turning the Widows Tears, the Orphans Cries,
The dead-mens Blood, the privy Maidens Groans,
For Husbands, Fathers, and betrothed Lovers,
That shall be swallowed in this Controversy.
This is his Claim, his Threatening, and my Message:
Unless the Dolphin be in presence here;
To whom expressly I bring greeting to.

For us, we will consider of this further:
To morrow shall you bear our full intent
Back to our Brother of England.

For the Dolphin,
I stand here for him: what to him from England?

Scorn and defiance, slight regard, contempt,
And any thing that may not mis-become
The mighty Sender, does he prize you at.
Thus says my King: and if your Fathers Highness
Do not, in grant of all demands at large,
Sweeten the bitter Mock you sent his Majesty;
He Will call you to so hot an Answer of it,
That Caves and Wombie Vaultages of France
Shall chide your Trespass, and return your Mock
In second Accent of his Ordinance.

Say: if my Father render fair return,
It is against my will: for I desire
Nothing but Odds with England,
To that end, as matching to his Youth and Vanity,
I did present him with the Paris-Balls.

He Will make your Paris Lover shake for it,
Were it the Mistress Court of mighty Europe:
And be assured, you will find a difference,
As we his Subjects have in wonder found,
Between the promise of his greener days,
And these he masters now: now he weighes Time
Even to the utmost Grain: that you shall read
In your own Losses, if he stay in France.

To morrow shall you know our mind at full.


Dispatch us with all speed, least that our King
Come here himself to question our delay;
For he is footed in this Land already.

You shall be soon dispatched, with fair conditions.
A Night is but small breathe, and little pawse,
To answer matters of this consequence.

Thus with imagined wing our swift Scene flies,
In motion of no less celeritie then that of Thought.
Suppose, that you have seen
The well-appointed King at Dover Peer,
Embarke his Royalty: and his brave Fleet,
With silken Streamers, the young Phoebus fayning;
Play with your Fancies: and in them behold,
Upon the Hempen Tackle, Ship-boyes climbing;
Hear the shrill Whistle, which does order give
To sounds confused: behold the threaden Sails,
Borne with the invisible and creeping Wind,
Draw the huge Bottomes through the furrowed Sea,
Bresting the lofty Surge. O, do but think
You stand upon the Riuage* and behold
A City on the inconstant Billows dancing:
For so appears this Fleet Maiesticall,
Holding due course to Harflew. Follow, follow:
Grapple your minds to sternage of this Navy,
And leave your England as dead Midnight, still,
Guarded with Grandsires, Babyes, and old Women,
Either past, or not arrived to pyth and puissance:
For who is he, whose Chin is but enricht
With one appearing Hair, that will not follow
These culled and choyse-drawne Caualiers to France?
Work, work your Thoughts, and therein see a Siege:
Behold the Ordenance on their Carriages,
With fatal mouths gaping on girded Harflew.
Suppose the Ambassador from the French comes back:
Tells Harry, That the King does offer him
Katherine his Daughter, and with her to Dowry,
Some petty and unprofitable Dukedomes.
The offer likes not: and the nimble Gunner
With Lynstock now the devilish Cannon touches
And down goes all before them. Still be kind,
And eech out our performance with your mind.
Once more unto the Breach,
Dear friends, once more;
Or close the Wall up with our English dead:
In Peace, there is nothing so becomes a man,
As modest stillnesse, and humility:
But when the blast of War blows in our ears,
Then imitate the action of the Tiger:
Stiffen the sinews, commune up the blood,
Disguise fair Nature with hard-fauour'd Rage:
Then lend the Eye a terrible aspect:
Let it pry through the portage of the Head,
Like the Brass Cannon: let the Brow o'rewhelme it,
As fearfully, as does a galled Rock
O're-hang and iutty his confounded Base,
Swill'd with the wild and wastfull Ocean,
Now set the Teeth, and stretch the Nosthrill wide,
Hold hard the Breath, and bend up every Spirit
To his full height. On, on, you Noblish English,
Whose blood is fet from Fathers of Warre-proofe:
Fathers, that like so many Alexanders,
Have in these parts from Morn till Even fought,
And sheathed their Swords, for lack of argument.
Dishonor not your Mothers: now attest,
That those whom you called Fathers, did beget you.
Be Copy now to me of grosser blood,
And teach them how to War. And you good Yeomen,
Whose Lyms were made in England; show us here
The mettell of your Pasture: let us swear,
That you are worth your breeding: which I doubt not:
For there is none of you so mean and base,
That has not Noble luster in your eyes.
I see you stand like Greyhounds in the slips,
Straying upon the Start. The Game's afoot:
Follow your Spirit; and upon this Charge,
Cry, God for Harry, England, and S. George.

On, on, on, on, on, to the breach, to the breach.


'Pray thee Corporal stay, the Knocks are too hot: and for mine own part, I
have not a Case of Lives: the humor of it is too hot, that is the very
plaine-Song of it


The plaine-Song is most just: for humors do abound: Knocks go and come: Gods
Vassals drop and dye: and Sword and Shield, in bloody Field, does win
immortal fame


Would I were in an Alehouse in London, I would give all my fame for a Pot of
Ale, and safety


And I: If wishes would prevail with me, my purpose should not fail with me;
but thither would I high


As duly, but not as truly, as Bird does sing on bough.


Up to the breach, you Dogs; auaunt you Cullions.


Be merciful great Duke to men of Mould: abate thy Rage, abate thy manly Rage;
abate thy Rage, great Duke. Good Bawcock bate thy Rage: use lenity sweet Chuck


These be good humors: your Honor wins bad humors.


As young as I am, I have observed these three Swashers: I am Boy to them all
three, but all they three, though they would serve me, could not be Man to me;
for indeed three such Antiques do not amount to a man: for Bardolph, he is
white-liuer'd, and red-fac'd; by the means whereof, a faces it out, but fights
not: for Pistol, he has a killing Tongue, and a quiet Sword; by the means
whereof, a breaks Words, and keeps whole Weapons: for Nim, he has heard,
that men of few Words are the best men, and therefore he scorns to say his
Prayers, lest a should be thought a Coward: but his few bad Words are matched
with as few good Deeds; for a never broke any man's Head but his own, and that
was against a Post, when he was drunk. They will steal any thing, and call it
Purchase. Bardolph stole a Lute-case, bore it twelve Leagues, and sold it for
three halfepence. Nim and Bardolph are sworn Brothers in filching: and in
Callice they stole a fire-shouell. I knew by that piece of Service, the men
would carry Coals. They would have me as familiar with men's Pockets, as their
Gloves or their Hand-kerchers: which makes much against my Manhood, if I should
take from another Pocket, to put into mine; for it is plain pocketting up of
Wrongs. I must leave them, and seek some better Service: their Villainy goes
against my weak stomach, and therefore I must cast it up


Captain Fluellen, you must come presently to the Mines; the Duke of
Gloucester would speak with you


To the Mines? Tell you the Duke, it is not so good to come to the Mines: for
look you, the Mines is not according to the disciplines of the War; the
concauities of it is not sufficient: for look you, the athuersarie, you may
discuss unto the Duke, look you, is digt himself four yard under the
Countermines: by Cheshu, I think a will plowe up all, if there is not better
directions


The Duke of Gloucester, to whom the Order of the Siege is given, is altogether
directed by an Irish man, a very valiant Gentleman in faith


It is Captain Makmorrice, is it not?


I think it be.


By Cheshu he is an Ass, as in the World, I will verify as much in his Beard:
he has no more directions in the true disciplines of the Wars, look you, of
the Roman disciplines, then is a Puppy-dog


Here a comes, and the Scots Captain, Captain Iamy, with him.


Captain Iamy is a marvelous falorous Gentleman, that is certain, and of
great expedition and knowledge in the aunchiant Wars, upon my particular
knowledge of his directions: by Cheshu he will maintain his Argument as well
as any Military man in the World, in the disciplines of the Pristine Wars of
the Romans


I say gudday, Captain Fluellen.


Godden to your Worship, good Captain James.


How now Captain Mackmorrice, have you quit the Mines? have the Pioners given
over


By Chrish Law tish ill done: the Work ish give over, the Trompet sound the
Retreat. By my Hand I swear, and my fathers Soul, the Work ish ill done: it
ish give over: I would have blowed up the Town, so Chrish save me law, in an
hour. O tish ill done, tish ill done: by my Hand tish ill done


Captain Mackmorrice, I beseech you now, will you voutsafe me, look you, a
few disputations with you, as partly touching or concerning the disciplines of
the War, the Roman Wars, in the way of Argument, look you, and friendly
communication: partly to satisfy my Opinion, and partly for the satisfaction,
look you, of my Mind: as touching the direction of the Military discipline,
that is the Point


It fall be vary good, good feith, good Captens bath, and I fall quit you with good
leave, as I may pick occasion: that fall I mary


It is no time to discourse, so Chrish save me: the day is hot, and the
Weather, and the Wars, and the King, and the Dukes: it is no time to
discourse, the Town is beseech'd: and the Trumpet call us to the breech, and we
talk, and be Chrish do nothing, it is shame for us all: so God sa'me it is shame
to stand still, it is shame by my hand: and there is Throats to be cut, and
Works to be done, and there ish nothing done, so Christ sa'me law


By the Mes, ere these eyes of mine take themselves to slomber, ayle de good
service, or I Will ligge in the grund for it; ay, or go to death: and I Will pay't
as valorously as I may, that fall I suerly do, that is the breff and the long:
mary, I wad full feign heard some question tween you tway


Captain Mackmorrice, I think, look you, under your correction, there is not
many of your Nation


Of my Nation? What ish my Nation? Ish a Villain, and a Basterd, and a Knave,
and a Rascal. What ish my Nation? Who talks of my Nation


Look you, if you take the matter otherwise then is meant, Captain
Mackmorrice, peradventure I shall think you do not use me with that
affability, as in discretion you ought to use me, look you, being as good a
man as your self, both in the disciplines of War, and in the deriuation of
my Birth, and in other particularities


I do not know you so good a man as my self: so Chrish save me, I will cut
off your Head


Gentlemen both, you will mistake each other.


A, that is a foul fault.


The Town sounds a Parley.


Captain Mackmorrice, when there is more better opportunity to be required,
look you, I will be so bold as to tell you, I know the disciplines of War:
and there is an end


How yet resolves the Governor of the Town?
This is the latest Parle we will admit:
Therefore to our best mercy give your selves,
Or like to men proud of destruction,
Defy us to our worst: for as I am a Soldier,
A Name that in my thoughts becomes me best;
If I begin the batt'rie once again,
I will not leave the halfe-atchieued Harflew,
Till in her ashes she lie buried.
The Gates of Mercy shall be all shut up,
And the fleshed Soldier, rough and hard of heart,
In liberty of bloody hand, shall raunge
With Conscience wide as Hell, mowing like Grass
Your fresh fair Virgins, and your flowring Infants.
What is it then to me, if impious War,
Arrayed in flames like to the Prince of Fiends,
Do with his smyrcht complexion all fell feats,
Enlynckt to wast and desolation?
What is it to me, when you your selves are cause,
If your pure Maidens fall into the hand
Of hot and forcing Violation?
What Reyne can hold licentious Wickedness,
When down the Hill he holds his fierce Carriere?
We may as bootlesse spend our vain Command
Upon the enraged Soldiers in their spoil,
As send Precepts to the Leuiathan, to come ashore.
Therefore, you men of Harflew,
Take pity of your Town and of your People,
Whiles yet my Soldiers are in my Command,
Whiles yet the cool and temperate Wind of Grace
O're-blowes the filthy and contagious Clouds
Of headly Murder, Spoil, and Villainy.
If not: why in a moment look to see
The blind and bloody Soldier, with foul hand
Desire the Locks of your shrill-shriking Daughters:
Your Fathers taken by the silver Beards,
And their most reverend Heads dashed to the Walls:
Your naked Infants spitted upon Pykes,
Whiles the mad Mothers, with their howles confused,
Do break the Clouds; as did the Wives of Iewry,
At Herod's bloody-hunting slaughter-men.
What say you? Will you yield, and this avoid?
Or guilty in defense, be thus destroyed.

Our expectation has this day an end:
The Dolphin, whom of Succors we entreated,
Returns us, that his Powers are yet not ready,
To raise so great a Siege: Therefore great King,
We yield our Town and Lives to thy soft Mercy:
Enter our Gates, dispose of us and ours,
For we no longer are defensible.

Open your Gates: Come Uncle Exeter,
Go you and enter Harflew; there remain,
And fortify it strongly against the French:
Use mercy to them all for us, dear Uncle.
The Winter coming on, and Sickness growing
Upon our Soldiers, we will retire to Calis.
To night in Harflew will we be your Guest,
To morrow for the March are we addressed.

Alice, tu as este en Augleterre, and tu bien parlas le Language.


En peu Madame.


Ie te pry m'ensigniez, il faut que ie apprend a parlen: Comient appelle vous
le main en Anglois?


Le main il and appelle de Hand.


De Hand.


Ele doyts.


Le doyts, ma foy Ie oublie, e doyt mays, ie me souemeray le doyts ie pense
qu'ils ont appelle de fingres, on de fingres.


Le main de Hand, le doyts le Fingres, ie pense que ie suis, le bon escholier.


IN ay gaynie diux mots d' Anglois vistement, coment appelle vous le ongles?


Le ongles, les appellons de Nails.


De Nails escoute: dites moy, si ie parle bien: de Hand, de Fingres, e de
Nails.


Cest bien dict Madame, il and fort bon Anglois.


Dites moy l' Anglois pour le bras.


De Arm, Madame.


E de coudee.


D' Elbow.


D' Elbow: Ie men fay le repiticio de touts les mots que vous maves, apprins
des a present.


Il and trop difficile Madame, comme Ie pense.


Excuse moy Alice escoute, d' Hand, de Fingre, de Nails, d' Arma, de Bilbow.


D' Elbow, Madame.


O Seigneur Dieu, ie men oublie d' Elbow, coment appelle vous le col.


De Nick, Madame.


De Nick, e le menton.


De Chin.


De Sin: le col de Nick, le menton de Sin.


Ouy. Sauf vostre honneur en verite vous pronouncies les mots ausi droict, que
le Natifs d' Angleterre.


Ie ne doubt point d' apprendre par de grace de Dieu, and en peu de temps.


N' aue vos y desia oublie ce que ie vous a enfignie.


Nome ie recitera a vous promptement, d' Hand, de Fingre, de Maylees.


De Nails, Madame.


De Nails, de Arm, de Ilbow.


Sans vostre honeus d' Elbow.


Ainsi de ie d' Elbow, de Nick, and de Sin: coment appelle vous les pied and de
roba.


Le Foot Madame, and le Count.


Le Foot, and le Count: O Seignieur Dieu, il sont le mots de son mauvais
corruptible gross and impudique, and non pour lo Dames de Honeur d' vser: le
ne voudray pronouncer ce mots deuant le Seigneurs de France, pour toute le
monde, fo le Foot and le Count, neant moys, Ie recitera un autrefoys ma lecon
ensembe, d' Hand, de Fingre, de Nails, d' Arm, d' Elbow, de Nick, de Sin, de
Foot, le Count.


Excellent, Madame.


C' est asses pour vne foyes, alons nous a diner.


It Is certain he has past the River Some.


And if he be not fought withal, my Lord,
Let us not live in France: let us quit all,
And give our Vineyards to a barbarous People.

O Dieu viuant: Shall a few Sprayes of us,
The emptying of our Fathers Luxury,
Our Syens, put in wild and savage Stock,
Spirt up so suddenly into the Clouds,
And ouer-looke their Grafters?

Normans, but bastard Normans, Norman bastards:
Mort du mavie, if they march along
Unfought withal, but I will sell my Dukedom,
To buy a slobbry and a durtie Farm
In that nooke-shotten I Will of Albion.

Dieu de Battles, where have they this mettell?
Is not their Clymate foggy, raw, and dull?
On whom, as in despite, the Sun looks pale,
Killing their Fruit with frowns. Can sodden Water,
A Drench for sur-reyn'd ^ades, their Ba^ly broth,
Decoct their cold blood to such valiant heat?
And shall our quick blood, spirited with Wine,
Seem frostie? O, for honor of our Land,
Let us not hang like roping Isyckles
Upon our Houses Thatch, whiles a more frostie People
Sweat drops of gallant Youth in our rich fields:
Poor we call them, in their Native Lords.

By Faith and Honor,
Our Madames mock at us, and plainly say,
Our Mettell is bred out, and they will give
Their bodies to the Lust of English Youth,
To new-store France with Bastard Warriors.

They bid us to the English Dancing-Schooles,
And teach Lauolta's high, and swift Carranto's,
Saying, our Grace is only in our Heels,
And that we are most lofty Run-awayes.

Where is Montioy the Herald? speed him hence,
Let him greet England with our sharp defiance.
Up Princes, and with spirit of Honor edged,
More sharper then your Swords, high to the field:
Charles Delabreth, High Constable of France,
You Dukes of Orleance, Burbon, and of Berry,
Alanson, Brabant, Bar, and Burgonic,
Jacques Chattillion, Rambures, Vandemont,
Beumont, Grand Free, Roussi, and Faulconbridge,
Loys, Lestrale, Bouciquall, and Charaloyes,
High Dukes, great Princes, Barons, Lords, and Kings;
For your great Seats, now quit you of great shames:
Bar Harry England, that sweepes through our Land
With Penons painted in the blood of Ha^flew:
Rush on his Host, as does the melted Snow
Upon the Valleys, whose low Vassal Seat,
The Alps does spit, and void his rhewme upon.
Go down upon him you have Power enough,
And in a Captive Chariot into Roan
Bring him our Prisoner.

This becomes the Great.
Sorry am I his numbers are so few,
His Soldiers sick, and famisht in their March:
For I am sure, when he shall see our Army,
He Will drop his heart into the sinck of fear,
And for atchieuement, offer us his Ransom.

Therefore Lord Constable, have on Montioy,
And let him say to England, that we send,
To know what willing Ransom he will give.
Prince Dolphin, you shall stay with us in Roan.

Not so, I do beseech your Majesty.

Be patient, for you shall remain with us.
Now forth Lord Constable, and Princes all,
And quickly bring us word of Englands fall.

How now Captain Fluellen, come you from the Bridge?


I assure you, there is very excellent Services committed at the Bridge.


Is the Duke of Exeter safe?


The Duke of Exeter is as magnanimous as Agamemnon, and a man that I love and
honor with my soul, and my heart, and my duty, and my live, and my living,
and my uttermost power. He is not, God be praised and blessed, any hurt in the
World, but keeps the Bridge most valiantly, with excellent discipline. There
is an ancient Lieutenant there at the Pridge, I think in my very conscience
he is as valiant a man as Mark Anthony, and he is a man of no estimation in
the World, but I did see him do as gallant service


What do you call him?


He is called ancient Pistol.


I know him not.


Here is the man.


Captain, I thee beseech to do me favors: the Duke of Exeter does love thee
well


I, I praise God, and I have merited some love at his hands.


Bardolph, a Soldier firm and sound of heart, and of buxome valor, has by
cruel Fate, and giddie Fortunes furious fickle Wheel, that Goddess blind,
that stands upon the rolling restless Stone


By your patience, ancient Pistol: Fortune is painted blind, with a Muffler
before his eyes, to signify to you, that Fortune is blind; and she is painted
also with a Wheel, to signify to you, which is the Moral of it, that she is
turning and inconstant, and mutabilitie, and variation: and her foot, look
you, is fixed upon a Sphericall Stone, which rowles, and rowles, and rowles: in
good truth, the Poet makes a most excellent description of it: Fortune is an
excellent Moral


Fortune is Bardolphs foe, and frowns on him: for he has stolen a Pax, and
hanged must a be: a damned death: let Gallows gape for Dog, let Man go
free, and let not Hemp his Windpipe suffocate: but Exeter has given the
doom of death, for Pax of little price. Therefore go speak, the Duke will
hear thy voice; and let not Bardolphs vital thread be cut with edge of
Penny-Cord, and vile reproach. Speak Captain for his Life, and I will thee
requite


Ancient Pistol, I do partly understand your meaning.


Why then rejoice therefore.


Certainly Ancient, it is not a thing to rejoice at: for if, look you, he
were my Brother, I would desire the Duke to use his good pleasure, and put him
to execution; for discipline ought to be used


Dye, and be damned, and Figo for thy friendship.


It is well.


The Fig of Spain.


Very good.


Why, this is an arrant counterfeit Rascal, I remember him now: a Bawd, a
Cutpurse


I Will assure you, a vtt'red as praue words at the Pridge, as you shall see in a
Summers day: but it is very well: what he has spoke to me, that is well I
warrant you, when time is serve


Why it is a Gull, a Fool, a Rogue, that now and then goes to the Wars, to
grace himself at his return into London, under the form of a Soldier: and
such fellows are perfect in the Great Commanders Names, and they will learn
you by rote where Services were done; at such and such a Sconce, at such a
Breach, at such a Conuoy: who came off bravely, who was shot, who disgraced,
what terms the Enemy stood on: and this they conne perfitly in the phrase of
War; which they trick up with new-tuned Oaths: and what a Beard of the
Generals Cut, and a horride Suit of the Camp, will do among foming Bottles,
and Ale-washt Wits, is wonderful to be thought on: but you must learn to know
such slanders of the age, or else you may be maruellously mistook


I tell you what, Captain Gower: I do perceive he is not the man that he
would gladly make show to the World he is: if I find a hole in his Coat, I
will tell him my mind: hark you the King is coming, and I must speak with
him from the Pridge


God please your Majesty.


How now Fluellen, came thou from the Bridge?


I, so please your Majesty: The Duke of Exeter has very gallantly maintained
the Pridge; the French is gone off, look you, and there is gallant and most
praue passages: marry, the athuersarie was have possession of the Pridge, but
he is enforced to retire, and the Duke of Exeter is Master of the Pridge: I can
tell your Majesty, the Duke is a praue man


What men have you lost, Fluellen?


The perdition of the athuersarie has been very great, reasonnable great:
marry for my part, I think the Duke has lost never a man, but one that is
like to be executed for robbing a Church, one Bardolph, if your Majesty know
the man: his face is all bubukles and whelkes, and knobs, and flames a fire,
and his lips blows at his nose, and it is like a coal of fire, sometimes
plew, and sometimes red, but his nose is executed, and his fire's out


We would have all such offenders so cut off: and we give express charge,
that in our Marches through the Country, there be nothing compelled from the
Villages; nothing taken, but paid for: none of the French vpbrayded or abused
in disdainefull Language; for when Leuitie and Cruelty play for a Kingdom,
the gentler Gamester is the soonest winner


You know me by my habit.


Well then, I know thee: what shall I know of thee?


My Masters mind.


Unfold it.


Thus says my King: Say thou to Harry of England, Though we seemed dead, we
did but sleep: Advantage is a better Soldier then rashness. Tell him, we
could have rebuked him at Harflewe, but that we thought not good to bruise an
injury, till it were full ripe. Now we speak upon our Q. and our voice is
imperial: England shall repent his folly, see his weakness, and admire our
sufferance. Bid him therefore consider of his ransom, which must proportion
the losses we have borne, the subjects we have lost, the disgrace we have
digested; which in weight to re-answer, his pettinesse would bow under. For our
losses, his Exchequer is too poor; for the effusion of our blood, the Muster
of his Kingdom too faint a number; and for our disgrace, his own person
kneeling at our feet, but a weak and worthless satisfaction. To this add
defiance: and tell him for conclusion, he has betrayed his followers, whose
condemnation is pronounced: So far my King and Master; so much my Office


What is thy name? I know thy quality.


Mountioy.


Thou doo'st thy Office fairly. Turn thee back,
And tell thy King, I do not seek him now,
But could be willing to march on to Callice,
Without impeachment: for to say the sooth,
Though it is no wisdom to confess so much
Unto an enemy of Craft and Vantage,
My people are with sickness much enfeebled,
My numbers lessened: and those few I have,
Almost no better then so many French;
Who when they were in health, I tell thee Herald,
I thought, upon one pair of English Legs
Did march three Frenchmen. Yet forgive me God,
That I do brag thus; this your air of France
Has blown that vice in me. I must repent:
Go therefore tell thy Master, here I am;
My Ransom, is this frail and worthless Trunk;
My Army, but a weak and sickly Guard:
Yet God before, tell him we will come on,
Though France himself, and such another Neighbor
Stand in our way. There Is for thy labor Mountioy.
Go bid thy Master well advise himself.
If we may pass, we will: if we be hindered,
We shall your tawnie ground with your red blood
Discolor: and so Mountioy, fare you well.
The sum of all our Answer is but this:
We would not seek a Battle as we are,
Nor as we are, we say we will not shun it:
So tell your Master.

I shall deliver so: Thanks to your Highness.


I hope they will not come upon us now.


We are in Gods hand, Brother, not in theirs:
March to the Bridge, ^t now draws toward night,
Beyond the River we will encampe our selves,
And on to morrow bid them march away.

Tut, I have the best Armor of the World: would it were day.


You have an excellent Armor; but let my Horse have his due.


It is the best Horse of Europe.


Will it never be Morning?


My Lord of Orleance, and my Lord High Constable, you talk of Horse and Armor?


You are as well provided of both, as any Prince in the World.


What a long Night is this? I will not change my Horse with any that treades
but on four postures: ch' ha: he bounds from the Earth, as if his entrayles
were hayres: le Cheual volante, the Pegasus, ches les na^nes de feu. When I
bestryde him, I soar, I am a Hawke: he trots the air: the Earth sings, when
he touches it: the basest horn of his hoose, is more Musical then the Pipe of
Hermes


He Is of the color of the Nutmeg.


And of the heat of the Ginger. It is a Beast for Perseus: he is pure Air and
Fire; and the dull Elements of Earth and Water never appear in him, but only
in patient stillnesse while his Rider mo^nts him: he is indeed a Horse, and
all other Iades you may call Beasts


Indeed my Lord, it is a most absolute and excellent Horse.


It is the Prince of Palfrayes, his Neigh is like the bidding of a Monarch, and
his countenance enforces Homage


No more Cousin.


Nay, the man has no wit, that cannot from the rising of the Lark to the
lodging of the Lamb, vary deserved praise on my Palsray: it is a Theme as
fluent as the Sea: Turn the Sands into eloquent tongues, and my Horse is
argument for them all: it is a subject for a Sovereign to reason on, and for a
Sovereigns Sovereign to ride on: And for the World, familiar to us, and
unknown, to lay apart their particular Functions, and wonder at him, I once
writ a Sonnet in his praise, and began thus, Wonder of Nature


I have heard a Sonnet begin so to ones Mistress.


Then did they imitate that which I composed to my Courser, for my Horse is my
Mistress


Your Mistress bears well.


Me well, which is the prescript praise and perfection of a good and particular
Mistress


Nay, for me thought yesterday your Mistress shrewdly shook your back.


So perhaps did yours.


Mine was not bridled.


O then belike she was old and gentle, and you rode like a Kerne of Ireland,
your French Hose off, and in your strait Strossers


You have good judgment in Horsemanship.


Be warned by me then: they that ride so, and ride not warily, fall into foul
Boggs: I had rather have my Horse to my Mistress


I had as live have my Mistress a Jade.


I tell thee Constable, my Mistress wears his own hair.


I could make as true a boast as that, if I had a Sow to my Mistress.


Le chien est return a son propre vemissement est la leuye lauee au bourbier:
thou make use of any thing


Yet do I not use my Horse for my Mistress, or any such Proverb, so little
kin to the purpose


My Lord Constable, the Armor that I saw in your Tent to night, are those
Stars or Suns upon it


Stars my Lord.


Some of them will fall to morrow, I hope.


And yet my Sky shall not want.


That may be, for you bear a many superfluously, and 'twere more honor some
were away


Even as your Horse bears your praises, who would trot as well, were some of
your bragges dismounted


Would I were able to load him with his desert. Will it never be day? I will
trot to morrow a mile, and my way shall be paued with English Faces


I will not say so, for fear I should be faced out of my way: but I would it
were morning, for I would feign be about the ears of the English


Who will go to Hazard with me for twenty Prisoners?


You must first go your self to hazard, ere you have them.


It Is Midnight, I Will go arm my self.


The Dolphin longs for morning.


He longs to eat the English.


I think he will eat all he kills.


By the white Hand of my Lady, he is a gallant Prince.


Swear by her Foot, that she may tread out the Oath.


He is simply the most active Gentleman of France.


Doing is actiuitie, and he will still be doing.


He never did harm, that I heard of.


Nor will do none to morrow: he will keep that good name still.


I know him to be valiant.


I was told that, by one that knows him better then you.


What Is he?


Marry he told me so himself, and he said he cared not who knew it.


He needs not, it is no hidden virtue in him.


By my faith Sir, but it is: never any body saw it, but his Lacquey: it is a
hooded valor, and when it appears, it will bate


Ill will never said well.


I will cap that Proverb with, There is flattery in friendship.


And I will take up that with, Give the Devil his due.


Well placed: there stands your friend for the Devil: have at the very eye of
that Proverb with, A Pox of the Devil


You are the better at Proverbs, by how much a Fools Bolt is soon shot.


You have shot over.


It Is not the first time you were ouer-shot.


My Lord high Constable, the English lie within fifteen hundred paces of your
Tents


Who has measured the ground?


The Lord Grandpree.


A valiant and most expert Gentleman. Would it were day? Alas poor Harry of
England: he longs not for the Dawning, as we do


What a wretched and peevish fellow is this King of England, to mope with his
fat-brain'd followers so far out of his knowledge


If the English had any apprehension, they would run away.


That they lack: for if their heads had any intellectual Armor, they could
never wear such heavy Head-pieces


That Island of England breeds very valiant Creatures; their Mastiffes are of
unmatchable courage


Foolish Curres, that run winking into the mouth of a Russian Bear, and have
their heads crushed like rotten Apples: you may as well say, that is a valiant
Flea, that dare eat his breakefast on the Lip of a Lion


Just, just: and the men do sympathize with the Mastiffes, in robustious and
rough coming on, leaving their Wits with their Wives: and then give them great
Meals of Beef, and Iron and Steel; they will eat like Wolves, and fight
like Devils


I, but these English are shrowdly out of Beef.


Then shall we find to morrow, they have only stomachs to eat, and none to
fight. Now is it time to arm: come, shall we about it


It is now two a Clock: but let me see, by ten
We shall have each a hundred English men.

Now entertain conjecture of a time,
When creeping Murmr and the poring Dark
Fills the wide Vessel of the Universe.
From Camp to Camp, through the foul Womb of Night
The Humme of either Army stilly sounds;
That the fixed Sentinels almost receive
The secret Whispers of each others Watch.
Fire answers fire, and through their paly flames
Each Battle sees the others vmber'd face.
Steed threatens Steed, in high and boastfull Neighs
Piercing the Nights dull Ear: and from the Tents,
The Armourers accomplishing the Knights,
With busy Hammers closing Riuets up,
Give dreadful note of preparation.
The Country Cocks do crow, the Clocks do towle:
And the third hour of drowsy Morning named,
Proud of their Numbers, and secure in Soul,
The confident and ouer-lustie French,
Do the low-rated English play at Dice;
And chide the creeple-tardy-gated Night,
Who like a foul and ougly Witch does limpe
So tediously away. The poor condemned English,
Like Sacrifices, by their watchful Fires
Sit patiently, and inly ruminate
The Mornings danger: and their gesture sad,
Inuesting lanke-leane Cheeks, and Warre-worne Coats,
Presented them unto the gazing Moon
So many horride Ghosts. O now, who will behold
The Royal Captain of this ruined Band
Walking from Watch to Watch, from Tent to Tent;
Let him cry, Praise and Glory on his head:
For forth he goes, and visits all his Host,
Bids them good morrow with a modest Smyle,
And calls them Brothers, Friends, and Countrymen.
Upon his Royal Face there is no note,
How dread an Army has enrounded him;
Nor does he dedicate one jot of Color
Unto the weary and all-watched Night:
But freshly looks, and ouer-beares Attaint,
With cheerful semblance, and sweet Majesty:
That every Wretch, pining and pale before,
Beholding him, plucks comfort from his Looks.
A Largess universal, like the Sun,
His liberal Eye does give to every one,
Thawing cold fear, that mean and gentle all
Behold, as may unworthiness define.
A little touch of Harry in the Night,
And so our Scene must to the Battle fly:
Where, O for pity, we shall much disgrace,
With four or five most vile and ragged foyles,
(Right ill disposed, in brawle ridiculous)
The Name of Agincourt: Yet sit and see,
Minding true things, by what their Mock'ries be.
Gloucester, it is true that we are in great danger,
The greater therefore should our Courage be.
God morrow Brother Bedford: God Almighty,
There is some soul of goodness in things evil,
Would men obseruingly distill it out.
For our bad Neighbor makes us early stirrers,
Which is both healthful, and good husbandry.
Besides, they are our outward Consciences,
And Preachers to us all; admonishing,
That we should dress us fairly for our end.
Thus may we gather Honey from the Weed,
And make a Moral of the Devil himself.
Good morrow old Sir Thomas Erpingham:
A good soft Pillow for that good white Head,
Were better then a churlish turfe of France.

Not so my Liege, this. Lodging likes me better,
Since I may say, now lie I like a King.

It Is good for men to love their present pains,
Upon example, so the Spirit is eased:
And when the Mind is quickened, out of doubt
The Organs, though defunct and dead before,
Break up their drowsy Grave, and newly move
With casted slough, and fresh legeritie.
Lend me thy Cloak Sir Thomas: Brothers both,
Commend me to the Princes in our Camp;
Do my good morrow to them, and anon
Desire them all to my Pauillion:

We shall, my Liege.


Shall I attend your Grace?


No, my good Knight:
Go with my Brothers to my Lords of England:
I and my Bosom must debate a while,
And then I would no other company.

The Lord in Heaven bless thee, Noble Harry.


God a mercy old Heart, thou speak chearefully.


Che vous la?


A friend.


Discuss unto me, art thou Officer, or art thou base, common, and popular?


I am a Gentleman of a Company.


Trayl'st thou the puissant Pyke?


Even so: what are you?


As good a Gentleman as the Emperor.


Then you are a better then the King.


The King's a Bawcock, and a Heart of Gold, a Lad of Life, an Impe of Fame, of
Parents good, of Fist most valiant: I kiss his durtie shoe, and from
heartstring I love the lovely Bully. What is thy Name


Harry le Roy.


Le Roy? a Cornish Name: art thou of Cornish Crew?


No, I am a Welchman.


Know thou Fluellen?


Yes.


Tell him I Will knock his Leeke about his Pate upon S. Dauies day.


Do not you wear your Dagger in your Cappe that day, least he knock that
about yours


Art thou his friend?


And his Kinsman too.


The Figo for thee then.


I thank you: God be with you.


My name is Pistol called.


It sorts well with your fierceness.


Captain Fluellen.


'So, in the Name of Jesus Christ, speak fewer: it is the greatest admiration
in the universal World, when the true and ancient Prerogatifes and Laws of
the Wars is not kept: if you would take the pains but to examine the Wars
of Pompey the Great, you shall find, I warrant you, that there is no tiddle
tadle nor pibble babble in Pompeyes Camp: I warrant you, you shall find the
Ceremonies of the Wars, and the Cares of it, and the Forms of it, and the
Sobriety of it, and the Modesty of it, to be otherwise


Why the Enemy is loud, you hear him all Night.


If the Enemy is an Ass and a Fool, and a prating Coxcombe; is it meet,
think you, that we should also, look you, be an Ass and a Fool, and a
prating Coxcombe, in your own conscience now


I will speak lower.


I pray you, and beseech you, that you will.


Though it appear a little out of fashion,
There is much care and valor in this Welchman.

Brother John Bates, is not that the Morning which breaks yonder?


I think it be: but we have no great cause to desire the approach of day.


We see yonder the beginning of the day, but I think we shall never see the
end of it. Who goes there


A Friend.


Under what Captain serve you?


Under Sir John Erpingham.


A good old Commander, and a most kind Gentleman: I pray you* what thinks he
of our estate


Even as men wrackt upon a Sand, that look to be washed off the next Tide.


He has not told his thought to the King?


No: nor it is not meet he should: for though I speak it to you, I think the
King is but a man, as I am: the Violet smells to him, as it does to me; the
Element shows to him, as it does to me; all his Senses have but humane
Conditions: his Ceremonies laid by, in his Nakedness he appears but a man;
and though his affections are higher mounted then ours, yet when they stoop,
they stoop with the like wing: therefore, when he sees reason of fears, as we
do; his fears, out of doubt, be of the same relish as ours are: yet in
reason, no man should possess him with any appearance of fear; least he, by
showing it, should dis-hearten his Army


He may show what outward courage he will: but I believe, as cold a Night as
it is, he could wish himself in Thames up to the Neck; and so I would he were,
and I by him, at all adventures, so we were quit here


By my troth, I will speak my conscience of the King: I think he would not
wish himself any where, but where he is


Then I would he were here alone; so should he be sure to be ransomed, and a
many poor men's lives saved


I dare say, you love him not so ill, to wish him here alone: howsoever you
speak this to feel other men's minds, me thinks I could not dye any where so
contented, as in the Kings company; his Cause being just, and his Quarrel
honorable


That Is more then we know.


I, or more then we should seek after; for we know enough, if we know we
are the Kings Subjects: if his Cause be wrong, our obedience to the King wipes
the Crime of it out of us


But if the Cause be not good, the King himself has a heavy Reckoning to
make, when all those Legs, and Arms, and Heads, chopped off in a Battle,
shall join together at the latter day, and cry all, We dyed at such a place,
some swearing, some crying for a Surgean; some upon their Wives, left poor
behind them; some upon the Debts they owe, some upon their Children rawly left:
I am afear'd, there are few dye well, that dye in a Battle: for how can they
charitably dispose of any thing, when Blood is their argument? Now, if these
men do not dye well, it will be a black matter for the King, that led them to
it; who to disobey, were against all proportion of subjection


So, if a Son that is by his Father sent about Merchandise, do sinfully
miscarry upon the Sea; the imputation of his wickedness, by your rule, should
be imposed upon his Father that sent him: or if a Servant, under his Masters
command, transporting a sum of Money, be assailed by Robbers, and dye in many
irreconcil'd Iniquities; you may call the business of the Master the author of
the Servants damnation: but this is not so: The King is not bound to answer the
particular endings of his Soldiers, the Father of his Son, nor the Master of
his Servant; for they purpose not their death, when they purpose their
services. Besides, there is no King, be his Cause never so spotless, if it
come to the arbitrament of Swords, can try it out with all unspotted
Soldiers: some (peradventure) have on them the guilt of premeditated and
contriued-Murther; some, of beguiling Virgins with the broken Seals of
Perjury; some, making the Wars their Bulwark, that have before gored the
gentle Bosom of Peace with Pillage and Robbery. Now, if these men have
defeated the Law, and outrunne Native punishment; though they can outstrip
men, they have no wings to fly from God. War is his Beadle, War is his
Vengeance: so that here men are punished, for before breach of the Kings Laws*
in now the Kings Quarrel: where they feared the death, they have borne life
away; and where they would be safe, they perish. Then if they dye unprovided,
no more is the King guilty of their damnation, then he was before guilty of
those Impieties, for the which they are now visited. Every Subjects Duty is
the Kings, but every Subjects Soul is his own. Therefore should every
Soldier in the Wars do as every sick man in his Bed, wash every Moth out
of his Conscience: and dying so, Death is to him advantage; or not dying, the
time was blessedly lost, wherein such preparation was gained: and in him that
escapes, it were not sin to think, that making God so free an offer, he let
him outliue that day, to see his Greatness, and to teach others how they
should prepare


It Is certain, every man that dies ill, the ill upon his own head, the King
is not to answer it


I do not desire he should answer for me, and yet I determine to fight
lustily for him


I my self heard the King say he would not be ransomed.


I, he said so, to make us fight chearefully: but when our throats are cut,
he may be ransomed, and we never the wiser


If I live to see it, I will never trust his word after.


You pay him then: that is a perilous shot out of an Elder Gunne, that a poor
and a private displeasure can do against a Monarch: you may as well go about
to turn the Sun to ye, with fanning in his face with a Peacocks feather:
You Will never trust his word after; come, it is a foolish saying


Your reproof is something too round, I should be angry with you, if the time
were convenient


Let it be a Quarrel between us, if you live.


I embrace it.


How shall I know thee again?


Give me any Gage of thine, and I will wear it in my Bonnet: Then if ever thou
dare acknowledge it, I will make it my Quarrel


Here Is my Glove: Give me another of thine.


There.


This will I also wear in my Cap: if ever thou come to me, and say, after to
morrow, This is my Glove, by this Hand I will take thee a box on the ear


If ever I live to see it, I will challenge it.


Thou dare as well be hanged.


Well, I will do it, though I take thee in the Kings company.


Keep thy word: fare thee well.


Be friends you English fools, be friends, we have French Quarrels enough, if
you could tell how to reckon


Indeed the French may lay twenty French Crowns to one, they will beat us,
for they bear them on their shoulders: but it is no English Treason to cut
French Crowns, and to morrow the King himself will be a Clipper

Upon the King, let us our Lives, our Souls,
Our Debts, our careful Wives,
Our Children, and our Sins, lay on the King:
We must bear all.
O hard Condition, Twin-borne with Greatness,
Subject to the breath of every fool, whose sense
No more can feel, but his own wringing.
What infinite hearts-ease must Kings neglect,
That private men enjoy?
And what have Kings, that Priuates have not too,
Save Ceremony, save general Ceremony?
And what art thou, thou Idol Ceremony?
What kind of God art thou? that suffer'st more
Of mortal griefs, then do thy worshippers.
What are thy Rents? what are thy Commings in?
O Ceremony, show me but thy worth.
What? is thy Soul of Odoration?
Art thou ought else but Place, Degree, and Form,
Creating awe and fear in other men?
Wherein thou art less happy, being feared,
Then they in fearing.
What drink'st thou often, in stead of Homage sweet,
But poisoned flattery? O, be sick, great Greatness,
And bid thy Ceremony give thee cure.
Thinks thou the fiery Fever will go out
With Titles blown from Adulation?
Will it give place to flexure and low bending?
Can thou, when thou command'st the beggars knee,
Command the health of it? No, thou proud Dream,
That play'st so subtly with a Kings Repose.
I am a King that find thee: and I know,
It Is not the Balm, the Scepter, and the Ball,
The Sword, the Mase, the Crown Imperial,
The enter-tissued Robe of Gold and Pearl,
The farsed Title running before the King,
The Throne he sits on: nor the Tide of Pomp,
That beats upon the high shore of this World:
No, not all these, thrice-gorgeous Ceremony;
Not all these, laid in Bed Maiesticall,
Can sleep so soundly, as the wretched Slave:
Who with a body filled, and vacant mind,
Gets him to rest, crammed with distressefull bread,
Never sees horride Night, the Child of Hell:
But like a Lacquey, from the Rise to Set,
Sweates in the eye of Phoebus; and all Night
Sleeps in Elysium: next day after dawne,
Does rise and help Hiperio to his Horse,
And follows so the euer-running year
With profitable labor to his Grave:
And but for Ceremony, such a Wretch,
Winding up Days with toil, and Nights with sleep,
Had the fore-hand and vantage of a King.
The Slave, a Member of the Countries peace,
Enioyes it; but in gross brain little wots,
What watch the King keeps, to maintain the peace;
Whose hours, the Pesant best advantages.

My Lord, your Nobles jealous of your absence,
Seek through your Camp to find you.

Good old Knight, collect them all together
At my Tent: I Will be before thee.

I shall do it, my Lord.


O God of Battles, steel my Soldiers hearts,
Possess them not with fear: Take from them now
The sense of reckning of the opposed numbers:
Pluck their hearts from them. Not to day, O Lord,
O not to day, think not upon the fault
My Father made, in compassing the Crown.
I Richards body have interred new,
And on it have bestowed more contrite tears,
Then from it issued forced drops of blood.
Five hundred poor I have in yearly pay,
Who twice a day their withered hands hold up
Toward Heaven, to pardon blood:
And I have built two Chauntries,
Where the sad and solemn Priests sing still
For Richards Soul. More-will I do:
Though all that I can do, is nothing worth;
Since that my Penitence comes after all,
Imploring pardon.

My Liege.


My Brother Gloucesters voice? I:
I know thy errand, I will go with thee:
The day, my friend, and all things stay for me.

The Sun does gild our Armor up, my Lords.


Monte Cheual: My Horse, Verlot Lacquay: Ha.


Oh brave Spirit.


Viales swes and terre.


Rien puis le air and f^.


Coin, Cousin Orleance.
Now my Lord Constable?

Hark how our Steedes, for present Service neigh.


Mount them, and make incision in their Hides,
That their hot blood may spin in English eyes,
And doubt them with superfluous courage: ha.

What, will you have them weep our Horses blood?
How shall we then behold their natural tears?

The English are embattail'd, you French Peers.


To Horse you gallant Princes, straight to Horse.
Do but behold yond poor and starued Band,
And your fair show shall suck away their Souls,
Leaving them but the shales and husks of men.
There is not work enough for all our hands,
Scarce blood enough in all their sickly Veins,
To give each naked Curtleax a stayne,
That our French Gallant^ shall to day draw out,
And sheath for lack of sport. Let us but blow on them,
The vapor of our Valor will o're-turne them.
It Is positive against all exceptions, Lords,
That our superfluous Lacquies, and our Pesants,
Who in unnecessary action swarm
About our Squares of Battle, were enough
To purge this field of such a hilding Foe;
Though we upon this Mountains Basis by,
Took stand for idle speculation:
But that our Honors must not. What Is to say?
A very little little let us do,
And all is done: then let the Trumpets sound
The Tucket Sonnance, and the Note to mount:
For our approach shall so much dare the field,
That England shall couch down in fear, and yield.

Why do you stay so long, my Lords of France?
Yond Island Carrions, desperate of their bones,
Ill-fauoredly become the Morning field:
Their ragged Curtains poorly are let loose,
And our Air shakes them passing scornefully.
Big Mars seems banqu'rout in their beggered Host,
And faintly through a rustie Beuer peepes.
The Horsemen sit like fixed Candlesticks,
With Torch-staues in their hand: and their poor Iades
Lob down their heads, dropping the hides and hips:
The gum down roping from their pale-dead eyes,
And in their pale dull mouths the Iymold Bitt
Lies foul with chaw'd-grasse, still and motionlesse.
And their executors, the knauish Crows,
Fly over them all, impatient for their hour.
Description cannot suit it self in words,
To demonstrate the Life of such a Battle,
In life so liuelesse, as it shows it self.

They have said their prayers,
And they ^ay for death.

Shall we go send them Dinners, and fresh Suits,
And give their fasting Horses Prouender,
And after fight with them?

I stay but for my Guard: on
To the field, I will the Banner from a Trumpet take,
And use it for my haste. Come, come away,
The Sun is high, and we out-weare the day.

Where is the King?


The King himself is rode to view their Battle.


Of fighting men they have full threescore thousand.


There Is five to one, besides they all are fresh.


Gods Arm strike with us, it is a fearful odds.
God buy' you Princes all; I Will to my Charge:
If we no more meet, till we meet in Heaven;
Then joyfully, my Noble Lord of Bedford,
My dear Lord Gloucester, and my good Lord Exeter,
And my kind Kinsman, Warriors all, adieu.

Farewell good Salisbury, and good luck go with thee:
And yet I do thee wrong, to mind thee of it,
For thou art framed of the firm truth of valor.

Farewell kind Lord: fight valiantly to day.


He is as full of Valor as of Kindness,
Princely in both.

O that we now had here
But one ten thousand of those men in England,
That do no work to day.

What Is he that wishes so?
My Cousin Westmerland. No, my fair Cousin:
If we are marked to dye, we are enough
To do our Country loss: and if to live,
The fewer men, the greater share of honor.
Gods will, pray thee wish not one man more.
By Jove, I am not covetous for Gold,
Nor care I who does seed upon my cost:
It yernes me not, if men my Garments wear;
Such outward things dwell not in my desires.
But if it be a sin to covet Honor,
I am the most offending Soul alive.
No 'faith, my Couze, wish not a man from England:
Gods peace, I would not loose so great an Honor,
^ one man more me thinks would share from me,
^r the best hope I have. O, do not wish one more:
^ther proclaim it (Westmerland) through my Host,
^at he which has no stomach to this fight,
^t him depart, his Pasport shall be made,
And Crowns for Conuoy put into his Purse:
We would not dye in that man's company,
That fears his fellowship, to dye with us.
This day is called the Feast of Crispian:
He that out-liues this day, and comes safe home,
Will stand a tip-toe when this day is named,
And rowie him at the Name of Crispian.
He that shall see this day, and live old age,
Will yearly on the Vigil feast his neighbors,
And say, to morrow is Saint Crispian.
Then will he strip his sleeue, and show his skarres:
Old men forget; yet all shall be forgot:
But he will remember, with advantages,
What feats he did that day. Then shall our Names,
Familiar in his mouth as household words,
Harry the King, Bedford and Exeter,
Warwick, and Talbot, Salisbury and Gloucester,
Be in their flowing Cups freshly remembered.
This story shall the good man teach his son:
And Crispine Crispian shall never go by,
From this day to the ending of the World,
But we in it shall be remembered;
We few, we happy few, we band of brothers:
For he to day that sheds his blood with me,
Shall be my brother: be he never so vile,
This day shall gentle his Condition*
And Gentlemen in England, now a bed,
Shall think the ^selues accursed they were not here;
And hold their Manhoods cheap, whiles any speaks,
That fought with us upon Saint Crispines day.

My Soueraign Lord, bestow your self with speed:
The French are bravely in their battles set,
And will with all expedience charge on us.

All things are ready, if our minds be so.


Perish the man, whose mind is backward now.


Thou do not wish more help from England, Couze?


Gods will, my Liege, would you and I alone,
Without more help, could fight this Royal battle.

Why now thou have vnwisht five thousand men:
Which likes me better, then to wish us one.
You know your places: God be with you all.

Once more I come to know of thee King Harry,
If for thy Ransom thou will now compound,
Before thy most assured Overthrow:
For certainly, thou art so near the Gulf,
Thou needs must be englutted. Besides, in mercy
The Constable desires thee, thou wilt-mind
Thy followers of Repentance; that their Souls
May make a peaceful and a sweet retire
From off these fields: where (wretches) their poor bodies
Must lie and sester.

Who has sent thee now?


The Constable of France.


I pray thee bear my former Answer back:
Bid them atchieue me, and then sell my bones.
Good God, why should they mock poor fellows thus?
The man that once did sell the Lions skin
While the beast lived, was killed with hunting him.
A many of our bodies shall no doubt
Find Native Graves: upon the which, I trust
Shall witness live in Brass of this days work.
And those that leave their valiant bones in France,
Dying like men, though buried in your Dunghills,
They shall be famed: for there the Sun shall greet them,
And draw their honors reeking up to Heaven,
Leaving their earthly parts to choke your Clyme,
The smell whereof shall breed a Plague in France.
Mark then abounding valor in our English:
That being dead, like to the bullets crasing,
Break out into a second course of mischief,
Killing in relapse of Mortality.
Let me speak prowdly: Tell the Constable,
We are but Warriors for the working day:
Our Gayness and our Gilt are all besmyrcht
With raynie Marching in the painful field.
There Is not a piece of feather in our Host:
Good argument (I hope) we will not fly:
And time has worn us into slouenrie.
But by the Mass, our hearts are in the trim:
And my poor Soldiers tell me, yet ere Night,
They Will be in fresher Robes, or they will pluck
The gay new Coats over the French Soldiers heads,
And turn them out of service. If they do this,
As if God please, they shall; my Ransom then
Will soon be leuyed.
Herald, save thou thy labor:
Come thou no more for Ransom, gentle Herald,
They shall have none, I swear, but these my joints:
Which if they have, as I will leave vm them,
Shall yield them little, tell the Constable.

I shall, King Harry. And so fare thee well:
Thou never shall hear Herald any more.

I fear thou will once more come again for a Ransom.


My Lord, most humbly on my knee I beg The leading of the Vaward.


Take it, brave York.
Now Soldiers march away,
And how thou please God, dispose the day.

Yield Curre.


Ie pense que vous estes le Gentilhome de bon qualitee.


Qualtitie calmie cuslure me. Art thou a Gentleman? What is thy Name? discuss.


O Seigneur Dieu.


O Signieur Dew should be a Gentleman: perpend my words O Signieur Dew, and
mark: O Signieur Dew, thou dyest on point of Fox, except O Signieur thou do
give to me egregious Ransom


O prennes miserecordie aye pitez de moy.


Moy shall not serve, I will have forty Moyes: for I will fetch thy rymme out
at thy Throat, in drops of Crimson blood


Est il impossible d'eschapper le force de ton bras.


Brass* Curre? thou damned and luxurious Mountain Goat, offer'st me Brass?


O perdonne moy.


Say thou me so? is that a Tonne of Moyes? Come hither boy, ask me this
slave in French what is his Name


Escoute comment estes vous appelle?


Mounsieur le Fer.


He says his Name is M. Fer.


M. Fer: I Will fer him, and firke him, and ferret him: discuss the same in
French unto him


I do not know the French for fer, and ferret, and firke.


Bid him prepare, for I will cut his throat.


Que dit il Mounsieur?


Il me command a vous dire que vous faite vous prost, car ce soldat icy est
disposee tout asture de couppes vostre gorge.


Owy, cuppele gorge permafoy pesant, unless thou give me Crowns, brave
Crowns* or mangled shall thou be by this my Sword


O Ie vous supply pour l'amour de Dieu: ma pardonner, Ie suis le Gentilhome de
bon maison, guard ma vie, and Ie vous donneray deux cent escus.


What are his words?


He prays you to save his life, he is a Gentleman of a good house, and for his
ransom he will give you two hundred Crowns


Tell him my fury shall abate, and I the Crowns will take.


Petit Monsieur que dit il?


Encore qu il et contra son Iurement, de pardonner aucune prisonner: neant-mon^
pour les escues que vous layt a promets, il est content a vous donnes lo
liberie le franchisement.


Sur mes genoux se vous donnes milles remercious, et Ie me estime heurex que Ie
intombe, enter les main. d'vn Cheualier Ie peuse le plus brane valiant et tres
distinie signieur d' Anglererre.


Expound unto me boy.


He gives you upon his knees a thousand thanks, and he esteems himself happy,
that he has fallen into the hands of one (as he thinker) the most brave,
valorous and thrice-worthy signeur of England


As I suck blood, I will some mercy show. Follow me.


Saaue vous lo grand Captain? I did never know so full a voice issue from so
empty a heart: but the saying is true. The empty vessel makes the greatest
sound, Bardolse and Nym had ten times more valor, then this roaring devil
in th old play, that every one may pair his nails with a wooden dagger,
and they are both hanged, and so would this be, if he durst steal any thing
adueuturously. I must stay with the Lackies with the luggage of our camp, the
French might have a good pray of us, if he knew of it, for there is none to
guard it but boys


O Diable.


O signeur le iour et perdia, toute et perdie.


Mor Dieu ma vie, all is confounded all,
Reproach, and everlasting shame
Sits mocking in our Plumes.
O meschante Fortune, do not run away.

Why all our ranks are broke.


O perdurable shame, let us stab our selves:
Be these the wretches that we played at dice for?

Is this the King we sent too, for his ransom?


Shame, and eternal shame, nothing but shame,
Let us dye in once more back again,
And he that will not follow Burbon now,
Let him go hence, and with his cap in hand
Like a base Pander hold the Chamber door,
Whilst a base slave, no gentler then my dog,
His fairest daughter is contaminated.

Disorder that has spoiled us, friend us now,
Let us on heaps go offer up our lives.

We are enough yet living in the Field,
To smother up the English in our throngs,
If any order might be thought upon.

The devil take Order now, I Will to the throng;
Let life be short, else shame will be too long.

Well have we done, thrice-valiant Countrymen,
But all is not done, yet keep the French the field.

The D. of York commends him to your Majesty


Lives he good Uncle: thrice within this hour
I saw him down; thrice up again, and fighting,
From Helmet to the spur, all blood he was.

In which array (brave Soldier) does he lie,
Larding the plain: and by his bloody side,
(Yoake-fellow to his honour-owing-wounds)
The Noble Earl of Suffolk also lies.
Suffolk first dyed, and York all hagled over
Comes to him, where in gore he lay insteeped,
And takes him by the Beard, kisses the gashes
That bloodily did yawne upon his face.
He cries aloud; Tarry my Cousin Suffolk,
My soul shall thine keep company to heaven:
Tarry (sweet soul) for mine, then fly a-brest:
As in this glorious and well-foughten field
We kept together in our Chivalry.
Upon these words I came, and cheered him up,
He smiled me in the face, raught me his hand,
And with a feeble gripe, says: Dear my Lord,
Commend my service to my Sovereign,
So did he turn, and over Suffolkes neck
He threw his wounded arm, and kissed his lips,
And so espoused to death, with blood he sealed
A Testament of Noble-ending-loue:
The pretty and sweet manner of it forced
Those waters from me, which I would have stopped,
But I had not so much of man in me,
And all my mother came into mine eyes,
And gave me up to tears.

I blame you not,
For hearing this, I must perforce compound
With mixtfull eyes, or they will issue to.
But hark, what new alarm is this same?
The French have re-enforc'd their scattered men:
Then every soldier kill his Prisoners,
Give the word through.

Kill the poyes and the luggage, It Is expressly against the Law of Arms, it is
as arrant a piece of knavery mark you now, as can be offert in your
Conscience now, is it not


It Is certain, there is not a boy left alive, and the Cowardly Rascals that
ran from the battle have done this slaughter: besides they have burned and
carried away all that was in the Kings Tent, wherefore the King most worthily
has caused every soldiour to cut his prisoners throat. O it is a gallant King


I, he was porne at Monmouth Captain Gower:
What call you the Towns name where Alexander the pig was borne?

Alexander the Great.


Why I pray you, is not pig, great? The pig, or the great, or the mighty, or
the huge, or the magnanimous, are all one reckonings, save the phrase is a
little variations


I think Alexander the Great was borne in Macedon, his Father was called
Phillip of Macedon, as I take it


I think it is in Macedon where Alexander is porne: I tell you Captain, if
you look in the Maps of the Orld, I warrant you sall find in the comparisons
between Macedon and Monmouth, that the situations look you, is both alike.
There is a River in Macedon, and there is also moreover a River at Monmouth, it
is called Wye at Monmouth: but it is out of my praines, what is the name of the
other River: but it is all one, it is alike as my fingers is to my fingers, and
there is Salmons in both. If you mark Alexanders life well, Harry of
Monmouthes life is come after it indifferent well, for there is figures in all
things. Alexander God knows, and you know, in his rages, and his furies, and
his wraths, and his chollers, and his moodes, and his displeasures, and his
indignations, and also being a little intoxicates in his praines, did in his
Ales and his angers (look you) kill his best friend Clytus


Our King is not like him in that, he never killed any of his friends.


It is not well done (mark you now) to take the tales out of my mouth, ere it
is made and finished. I speak but in the figures, and comparisons of it: as
Alexander killed his friend Clytus, being in his Ales and his Cups; so also
Harry Monmouth being in his right wits, and his good judgments, turned away
the fat Knight with the great belly doublet: he was full of jests, and gypes,
and knaueries, and mockes, I have forgot his name


Sir John Falstaff.


That is he: I Will tell you, there is good men porne at Monmouth.


Here comes his Majesty.


I was not angry since I came to France,
Until this instant. Take a Trumpet Herald,
Ride thou unto the Horsemen on yond hill:
If they will fight with us, bid them come down,
Or void the field: they do offend our sight.
If they will do neither, we will come to them,
And make them sker away, as swift as stones
Enforced from the old Assyrian slings:
Besides, we will cut the throats of those we have,
And not a man of them that we shall take,
Shall taste our mercy. Go and tell them so.

Here comes the Herald of the French, my Liege


His eyes are humbler then they used to be.


How now, what means this Herald? Know thou not,
That I have fined these bones of mine for ransom?
Come thou again for ransom?

No great King:
I come to thee for charitable License,
That we may wander ore this bloody field,
To book our dead, and then to bury them,
To sort our Nobles from our common men.
For many of our Princes (woe the while)
Lie drowned and soaked in mercenary blood:
So do our vulgar drench their peasant limbs
In blood of Princes, and with wounded steeds
Fret fet-locke deep in gore, and with wild rage
Yerke out their armed heels at their dead masters,
Killing them twice, O give us leave great King,
To view the field in safety, and dispose
Of their dead bodies.

I tell thee truly Herald,
I know not if the day be ours or no,
For yet a many of your horsemen peer,
And gallop ore the field.

The day is yours.


Praised be God, and not our strength for it:
What is this Castle called that stands hard by.

They call it Agincourt.


Then call we this the field of Agincourt,
Fought on the day of Crispin Crispianus.

Your Grandfather of famous memory (an't please your Majesty) and your great
Uncle Edward the Placke Prince of Wales, as I have read in the Chronicles,
fought a most praue pattle here in France


They did Fluellen.


Your Majesty says very true: If your Majesty's is remembered of it, the
Welchmen did good service in a Garden where Leekes did grow, wearing Leekes in
their Monmouth caps, which your Majesty know to this hour is an honorable
badge of the service: And I do believe your Majesty takes no scorn to wear
the Leeke upon S. Tau^es day


I wear it for a memorable honor:
For I am Welsh you know good Countriman.

All the water in Wye, cannot wash your Majesty's Welsh plood out of your pody,
I can tell you that: God please it, and preserve it; as long as it pleases his
Grace, and his Majesty too


Thanks good my Countrymen.


By leshu, I am your Majesty's Countreyman, I care not who know it: I will
confess it to all the Orld, I need not to be ashamed of your Majesty, praised
be God so long as your Majesty is an honest man


Good keep me so.
Our Heralds go with him,
Bring me just notice of the numbers dead
On both our parts. Call yonder fellow hither.

Soldier, you must come to the King.


Soldier, why wear'st thou that Glove in thy Cappe?


And't please your Majesty, it is the gage of one that I should fight withal, if
he be alive


An Englishman?


And't please your Majesty, a Rascal that swagge^'d with me last night: who if
alive, and ever dare to challenge this Glove, I have sworn to take him a box
a' th ere: or if I can see my Glove in his cappe, which he swore as he was a
Soldier he would wear (if alive) I will strike it out soundly


What think you Captain Fluellen, is it fit this soldier keep his oath.


He is a Crauen and a Villain else, and't please your Majesty in my
conscience


It may be, his enemy is a Gentleman of great sort quite from the answer of
his degree


Though he be as good a Ientleman as the devil is, as Lucifer and Beelzebub
himself, it is necessary (look your Grace) that he keep his vow and his
oath: If he be perjured (see you now) his reputation is as arrant a villain
and a lack sauce, as ever his black shoo trodd upon Gods ground, and his
earth, in my conscience la


Then keep thy vow sirrah, when thou meet'st the fellow.


So, I will my Liege, as I live.


Who seru'st thou under?


Under Captain Gower, my Liege.


Gower is a good Captain, and is good knowledge and literatured in the Wars.


Call him hither to me, Soldier.


I will my Liege.


Here Fluellen, wear thou this favor for me, and stick it in thy Cappe: when
Alanson and my self were down together, I plackt this Glove from his Helm:
If any man challenge this, he is a friend to Alanson, and an enemy to our
Person; if thou encounter any such, apprehend him, and thou do me love


Your Grace doo's me as great Honors as can be desired in the hearts of his
Subjects: I would feign see the man, that has but two legs, that shall find
himself agreesd at this Glove; that is all: but I would feign see it once, and
please God of his grace that I might see


Know thou Gower?


He is my dear friend, and please you.


Pray thee go seek him, and bring him to my Tent.


I will fetch him.


My Lord of Warwick, and my Brother Gloucester,
Follow Fluellen closely at the heels.
The Glove which I have given him for a favor,
May happily purchase him a box a' the care.
It is the Soldiers: I by bargain should
Wear it my self. Follow good Cousin Warwick:
If that the Soldier strike him, as I judge
By his blunt bearing, he will keep his word;
Some sudden mischief may arise of it:
For I do know Fluellen valiant,
And touched with Choler, hot as Gunpowder,
And quickly will return an injury.
Follow, and see there be no harm between them.
Go you with me, Uncle of Exeter.

I warrant it is to Knight you, Captain.


Gods will, and his pleasure, Captain, I beseech you now, come apace to the
King: there is more good toward you peradventure, then is in your knowledge to
dream of


Sir, know you this Glove?


Know the Glove? I know the Glove is a Glove.


I know this, and thus I challenge it.


'Sbl^d, an arrant Traitor as anyes in the Universal World, or in France, or
in England


How now Sir? you Villain.


Do you think I Will be forsworn?


Stand away Captain Gower, I will give Treason his payment into plowes, I
warrant you


I am no Traitor.


That Is a Lie in thy Throat. I charge you in his Majesty's Name apprehend him,
he is a friend of the Duke Alansons


How now, how now, what is the matter?


My Lord of Warwick, here is, praised be God for it, a most contagious Treason
come to light, look you, as you shall desire in a Summers day. Here is his
Majesty


How now, what is the matter?


My Liege, here is a Villain, and a Traitor, that look your Grace, has
struck the Glove which your Majesty is take out of the Helmet of Alanson


My Liege, this was my Glove, here is the fellow of it: and he that I gave it
to in change, promised to wear it in his Cappe: I promised to strike him, if
he did: I met this man with my Glove in his Cappe, and I have been as good as
my word


Your Majesty hear now, saving your Majesty's Manhood, what an arrant
rascally, beggarly, lousy Knave it is: I hope your Majesty is pear me
testimony and witness, and will auouchment, that this is the Glove of
Alanson, that your Majesty is give me, in your Conscience now


Give me thy Glove Soldier;
Look, here is the fellow of it:
'Twas I indeed thou promised'st to strike,
And thou have given me most bitter terms.

And please your Majesty, let his Neck answer for it, if there is any
Marshall Law in the World


How can thou make me satisfaction?


All offenses, my Lord, come from the heart: never came any from mine, that
might offend your Majesty


It was our self thou did abuse.


Your Majesty came not like your self: you appeared to me but as a common
man; witness the Night, your Garments, your Lowliness: and what your
Highness suffered under that shape, I beseech you take it for your own fau^t,
and not mine: for had you been as I took you for, I made no offense;
therefore I beseech your Highness pardon me


Here Uncle Exeter, fill this Glove with Crowns,
And give it to this fellow. Keep it fellow,
And wear it for an Honor in thy Cappe,
Till I do challenge it. Give him the Crowns:
And Captain, you must needs be friends with him.

By this Day and this Light, the fellow has mettell enough in his belly: Hold,
there is twelue-pence for you, and I pray you to serve God, and keep you out
of prawles and prabbles, and quarrels and dissentions, and I warrant you it is
the better for you


I will none of your Money.


It is with a good will: I can tell you it will serve you to mend your shoes:
come, wherefore should you be so pashfull, your shoes is not so good: it is a
good silling I warrant you, or I will change it


Now Herald, are the dead numbered?


Here is the number of the slaught'red French.


What Prisoners of good sort are taken, Uncle?


Charles Duke of Orleance, Nephew to the King,
John Duke of Burbon, and Lord Bouchiquald:
Of other Lords and Barons, Knights and Squires,
Full fifteen hundred, besides common men.

This Note does tell me of ten thousand French
That in the field lie slain: of Princes in this number,
And Nobles bearing Banners, there lie dead
One hundred twenty six: added to these,
Of Knights, Esquires, and gallant Gentlemen,
Eight thousand and four hundred: of the which,
Five hundred were but yesterday dubbed Knights.
So that in these ten thousand they have lost,
There are but sixteen hundred Mercenaries:
The rest are Princes, Barons, Lords, Knights, Squires,
And Gentlemen of blood and quality.
The Names of those their Nobles that lie dead:
Charles Delabreth, High Constable of France,
Jacques of Chatilion, Admiral of France,
The Master of the Crosse-bowes, Lord Rambures,
Great Master of France, the brave Sir Guichard Dolphin,
John Duke of Alanson, Anthony Duke of Brabant,
The Brother to the Duke of Burgundy,
And Edward Duke of Bar: of lusty Earls,
Grandpree and Roussie, Fauconbridge and Foyes,
Beaumont and Marle, Vandemont and Lestrale.
Here was a Royal fellowship of death.
Where is the number of our English dead?
Edward the Duke of York, the Earl of Suffolk,
Sir Richard Ketly, Dauy Gam Esquire;
None else of name: and of all other men,
But five and twenty.
O God, thy Arm was here:
And not to us, but to thy Arm alone,
Ascribe we all: when, without stratagem,
But in plain shock, and even play of Battle,
Was ever known so great and little loss?
On one part and on the other, take it God,
For it is none but thine.

It Is wonderful.


Come, go me in procession to the Village:
And be it death proclaimed through our Host,
To boast of this, or take that praise from God,
Which is his only.

Is it not lawful and please your Majesty, to tell how many is killed?


Yes Captain: but with this acknowledgement,
That God fought for us.

Yes, my conscience, he did us great good.


Do we all holy Rights:
Let there be sung Non nobis, and Te Deum,
The dead with charity enclosed in Clay:
And then to Callice, and to England then,
Where never from France arrived more happy men.

Vouchsafe to those that have not read the Story,
That I may prompt them: and of such as have,
I humbly pray them to admit the excuse
Of time, of numbers, and due course of things,
Which cannot in their huge and proper life,
Be here presented. Now we bear the King
Toward Callice: Grant him there; there seen,
Heave him away upon your winged thoughts,
Athwart the Sea: Behold the English beach
Pales in the flood; with Men, Wives, and Boys,
Whose shouts and claps out-voyce the deep-mouthed Sea,
Which like a mighty Whiffler before the King,
Seems to prepare his way: So let him land,
And solemnly see him set on to London.
So swift a pace has Thought, that even now
You may imagine him upon Black Heath:
Where, that his Lords desire him, to have borne
His bruised Helmet, and his bended Sword
Before him, through the City: he forbids it,
Being free from vain-nesse, and selfe-glorious pride;
Giving full Trophee, Signal, and Ostent,
Quite from himself, to God. But now behold,
In the quick Forge and working-house of Thought,
How London does power out her Citizens,
The Mayor and all his Brethren in best sort,
Like to the Senators of the antique Rome,
With the Plebeians swarming at their heels,
Go forth and fetch their Conquering Caesar in:
As by a lower, but by loving likelihood,
Were now the General of our gracious Empress,
As in good time he may, from Ireland coming,
Bringing Rebellion broached on his Sword;
How many would the peaceful City quit,
To welcome him? much more, and much more cause,
Did they this Harry. Now in London place him.
As yet the lamentation of the French
Inuites the King of Englands stay at home:
The Emperor's coming in behalf of France,
To order peace between them: and omit
All the occurrences, what ever chanced,
Till Harryes back return again to France:
There must we bring him; and my self have played
The interim, by remembering you it is past.
Then brook abridgement, and your eyes advance,
After your thoughts, straight back again to France.
Nay, that is right: but why wear you your Leeke to day? S. Dauies day is past.


There is occasions and causes why and wherefore in all things: I will tell you
ass my friend, Captain Gower; the rascally, scauld, beggarly, lousy,
pragging Knave Pistol, which you and your self, and all the World, know to be
no petter then a fellow, look you now, of no merits: he is come to me, and
prings me pread and sault yesterday, look you, and bid me eat my Leeke: it
was in a place where I could not breed no contention with him; but I will be so
bold as to wear it in my Cap till I see him once again, and then I will tell
him a little piece of my desires


Why here he comes, swelling like a Turkycock.


It Is no matter for his swellings, nor his Turkycocks. God please you ancient
Pistol: you scuruie lousy Knave, God please you


Ha, art thou bedlam? do thou thirst, base Trojan, to have me fold up Parcas
fatal Web? Hence; I am qualmish at the smell of Leeke


I peseech you heartily, scuruie lousy Knave, at my desires, and my requests,
and my petitions, to eat, look you, this Leeke; because, look you, you do
not love it, nor your affections, and your appetites and your disgestions doo's
not agree with it, I would desire you to eat it


Not for Cadwallader and all his Goats.


There is one Goat for you.
Will you be so good, scauld Knave, as eat it?

Base Trojan, thou shall dye.


You say very true, scauld Knave, when Gods will is: I will desire you to live
in the mean time, and eat your Victuals: come, there is sauce for it. You
called me yesterday Mountaine-Squier, but I will make you to day a squire of
low degree. I pray you fall too, if you can mock a Leeke, you can eat a Leeke


Enough Captain, you have astonished him.


I say, I will make him eat some part of my leeke, or I will peate his pate
four days: bite I pray you, it is good for your green wound, and your
ploodie Coxecombe


Must I bite.


Yes certainly, and out of doubt and out of question too, and ambiguities.


By this Leeke, I will most horribly revenge I eat and eat I swear.


Eat I pray you, will you have some more sauce to your Leeke: there is not
enough Leeke to swear by


Qu^et thy Cudgel, thou do see I eat.


Much good do you scald knave, heartily. Nay* pray you throw none away, the
skin is good for your broken Coxcombe; when you take occasions to see Leekes
hereafter, I pray you mock at 'em, that is all


Good.


I, Leekes is good: hold you, there is a groat to heal your pate.


Me a groat?


Yes verily, and in truth you shall take it, or I have another Leeke in my
pocket, which you shall eat


I take thy groat in earnest of revenge.


If I owe you any thing, I will pay you in Cudgels, you shall be a Woodmonger,
and buy nothing of me but cudgels: God bu'y you, and keep you, and heal your
pate


All hell shall stir for this.


Go, go, you are a counterfeit cowardly Knave, will you mock at an ancient
Tradition began upon an honorable respect, and worn as a memorable Trophee
of predeceased valor, and dare not avouch in your deeds any of your words. I
have seen you gleeking and galling at this Gentleman twice or thrice. You
thought, because he could not speak English in the native garb, he could not
therefore handle an English Cudgel: you find it otherwise, and henceforth let
a Welsh correction, teach you a good English condition, fare ye well


Does fortune play the huswife with me now? News have I that my Doll is dead
in th Spittle of a malady of France, and there my rendeuous is quite cut off:
Old I do wax, and from my weary limbs honor is Cudgeld. Well, Baud I Will
turn, and something lean to Cutpurse of quick hand: To England will I
steal, and there I Will steal

And patches will I get unto these cudgeld scarres,
And swore I got them in the Gallia wars.

Peace to this meeting, wherefore we are met;
Unto our brother France, and to our Sister
Health and fair time of day: Joy and good wishes
To our most fair and Princely Cosine Katherine:
And as a branch and member of this Royalty,
By whom this great assembly is contrived,
We do salute you Duke o^ Burgogne,
And Princes French and Peers health to you all.

Right joyous are we to behold your face.
Most worthy brother England, fairly met,
So are you Princes (English) every one.

So happy be the Issue brother Ireland
Of this good day, and of this gracious meeting,
As we are now glad to behold your eyes,
Your eyes which hitherto have borne
In them against the French that met them in their bent,
The fatal Balls of murdering Basiliskes:
The venom of such Looks we fairly hope
Have lost their quality, and that this day
Shall change all griefs and quarrels into love.

To cry A men to that, thus we appear.


You English Princes all, I do salute you.


My duty to you both, on equal love.
Great Kings of France and England: that I have labored
With all my wits, my pains, and strong endeavors,
To bring your most Imperial Majesty's
Unto this Bar, and Royal enterview;
Your Mightiness on both parts best can witness.
Since then my Office has so far preuayl'd,
That Face to Face, and Royal Eye to Eye,
You have congreeted: let it not disgrace me,
If I demand before this Royal view,
What Rub, or what Impediment there is,
Why that the naked, poor, and mangled Peace,
Dear Nourse of Arts, Plentyes, and joyful Births,
Should not in this best Garden of the World,
Our fertile France, put up her lovely Visage?
Alas, she has from France too long been chased,
And all her Husbandry does lie on heaps,
Corrupting in it own fertility.
Her Vine, the merry chearer of the heart,
Vnpruned, dies: her Hedges even pleach'd,
Like Prisoners wildly ouer-growne with hair,
Put forth disordered Twigs: her fallow Leas,
The Darnell, Hemlock, and ^anke Femetary,
Does too^ upon; while that the Culter rusts,
That should de^acinate such Sauagery:
The even Meade, that erst brought sweetly forth
The freckled Cowslip, Burnet, and green Clouer,
Wanting the Sithe, withal uncorrected, rank;
Conceiues by idleness, and nothing teemes,
But hateful Docks, rough Thistles, Keksyes, Burres,
Loosing both beauty and utility;
And all our Vineyards, Fallowes, Meades, and Hedges,
Defective in their natures, grow to wildness.
Even so our Houses, and our selves, and Children,
Have lost, or do not learn, for want of time,
The Sciences that should become our Country;
But grow like Savages, as Soldiers will,
That nothing do* but meditate on Blood,
To Swearing, and stern Looks, defus'd Attire,
And every thing that seems unnatural.
Which to reduce into our former favor,
You are assembled: and my speech entreats,
That I may know the Let why gentle Peace
Should not expel these inconveniences,
And bless us with her former qualities.

If Duke of Burgonie, you would the Peace,
Whose want gives growth to the imperfections
Which you have cited; you must buy that Peace
With full accord to all our just demands,
Whose Tenures and particular effects
You have enschedul'd briefly in your hands.

The King has heard them: to the which, as yet
There is no Answer made.

Well then: the Peace which you before so urged,
Lies in his Answer.

I have but with a curselarie eye
O're-glanc't the Articles: Pleases your Grace
To appoint some of your Council presently
To sit with us once more, with better heed
To re-suruey them; we will suddenly
Pass our accept and peremptory Answer.

Brother we shall. Go Uncle Exeter,
And Brother Clarence, and you Brother Gloucester,
Warwick, and Huntington, go with the King,
And take with you free power, to ratify,
Augment, or alter, as your Wisdoms best
Shall see aduantageable for our Dignity,
Any thing in or out of our Demands,
And we will consigne thereto. Will you, fair Sister,
Go with the Princes, or stay here with us?

Our gracious Brother, I will go with them:
Happily a Woman's Voice may do some good,
When Articles too nicely urged, be stood on.

Yet leave our Cousin Katherine here with us,
She is our capital Demand, comprised
Within the fore-ranke of our Articles.

She has good leave.


Fair Katherine, and most fair,
Will you vouchsafe to teach a Soldier terms,
Such as will enter at a Ladies ear,
And plead his Loue-suit to her gentle heart.

Your Majesty shall mock at me, I cannot speak your England.


O fair Katherine, if you will love me soundly with your French heart, I will
be glad to hear you confess it brokenly with your English Tongue. Do you
like me, Kate


Pardonne moy, I cannot tell wat is like me.


An Angel is like you Kate, and you are like an Angel.


Que dit il que Ie suis semblable a les Anges?


Ouy verayment (sauf vostre Grace) ainsi dit il.


I said so, dear Katherine, and I must not blush to affirm it.


O bon Dieu, les langues des hommes sont plein de tromperies.


What says she, fair one? that the tongues of men are full of deceits?


Ouy, dat de tongeus of de man's is be full of deceits: dat is de Princess.


The Princess is the better English-woman: in faith Kate, my wooing is fit for
thy understanding, I am glad thou can speak no better English, for if thou
could, thou would find me such a plain King, that thou would think,
I had sold my Farm to buy my Crown. I know no ways to mince it in love, but
directly to say, I love you; then if you urge me farther, then to say, Do you
in faith? I wear out my suite: Give me your answer, in faith do, and so clap
hands, and a bargain: how say you, Lady


Sauf vostre honeur, me understand well.


Marry, if you would put me to Verses, or to Dance for your sake, Kate, why you
undid me: for the one I have neither words nor measure; and for the other, I
have no strength in measure, yet a reasonable measure in strength. If I could
win a Lady at Leape-frogge, or by vawting into my Saddle, with my Armor on
my back; under the correction of bragging: be it spoken. I should quickly
leap into a Wife: Or if I might buffet for my Love, or bound my Horse for her
favors, I could lay on like a Butcher, and sit like a Jack an Apes, never off.
But before God Kate, I cannot look greenely, nor gasp out my eloquence, nor I
have no cunning in protestation; only downright Oaths, which I never use
till urged, nor never break for urging. If thou can love a fellow of this
temper, Kate, whose face is not worth Sunne-burning? that never looks in his
Glass, for love of any thing he sees there? let thine Eye be thy Cook. I
speak to thee plain Soldier: If thou can love me for this, take me? if
not? to say to thee that I shall dye, is true; but for thy love, by the L. No:
yet I love thee too. And while thou live, dear Kate, take a fellow of plain
and uncoined Constancy, for he perforce must do thee right, because he has
not the gift to woo in other places: for these fellows of infinite tongue,
that can ryme themselves into Ladies savors, they do always reason
themselves out again. What? a speaker is but a prater, a Ryme is but a Ballad;
a good Leg will fall, a strait Back will stoop, a black Beard will turn
white, a curled Pate will grow bald, a fair Face will wither, a full Eye will
wax hollow: but a good Heart, Kate, is the Sun and the Moon, or rather the
Sun, and not the Moon; for it shines bright, and never changes, but keeps
his course truly. If thou would have such a one, take me? and take me; take a
Soldier: take a Soldier; take a King. And what say thou then to my Love?
speak my fair, and fairly, I pray thee


Is it possible dat I sold love de ennemie of France?


No, it is not possible you should love the Enemy of France, Kate; but in
loving me, you should love the Friend of France: for I love France so well,
that I will not part with a Village of it; I will have it all mine: and Kate,
when France is mine, and I am yours; then yours is France, and you are mine


I cannot tell wat is dat.


No, Kate? I will tell thee in French, which I am sure will hang upon my
tongue, like a new-married Wife about her Husbands Neck, hardly to be shook
off; Ie quand sur le possession de France, and quand vous aues le possession
de moy. (Let me see, what then? Saint Dennis be my speed) Donc vostre est
France, and vous estes mienne. It is as easy for me, Kate, to conquer the
Kingdom, as to speak so much more French: I shall never move thee in French,
unless it be to laugh at me


Sauf vostre honeur, le Francois ques vous parleis, il and melieus que l'
Anglois le quel Ie parle.


No faith is it not, Kate: but thy speaking of my Tongue, and I thine, most
truly falsely, must needs be granted to be much at one. But Kate, doo'st
thou understand thus much English? Can thou love me


I cannot tell.


Can any of your Neighbors tell, Kate? I Will ask them. Come, I know thou love
me: and at night, when you come into your Closet, you will question this
Gentlewoman about me; and I know, Kate, you will to her disprayse those parts
in me, that you love with your heart: but good Kate, mock me mercifully, the
rather gentle Princess, because I love thee cruelly. If ever thou be mine,
Kate, as I have a saving Faith within me tells me thou shall; I get thee with
skambling, and thou must therefore needs prove a good Souldier-breeder: Shall
not thou and I, between Saint Dennis and Saint George, compound a Boy, half
French half English, that shall go to Constantinople, and take the Turk by
the Beard. Shall we not? what say thou, my fair Flower-de-Luce


I do not know dat.


No: it is hereafter to know, but now to promise: do but now promise Kate, you
will endeavor for your French part of such a Boy; and for my English moytie,
take the Word of a King, and a Batcheler. How answer you. La plus belle
Katherine du monde mon trescher and deuin deesse


Your Maiestee aue fause French enough to deceive de most sage Damoiscil dat
is en France


Now fie upon my false French: by mine Honor in true English, I love thee Kate;
by which Honor, I dare not swear thou love me, yet my blood begins to
flatter me, that thou doo'st; notwithstanding the poor and vntempering effect
of my Visage. Now beshrew my Fathers Ambition, he was thinking of Civil
Wars when he got me, therefore was I created with a stubborn outside, with
an aspect of Iron, that when I come to woo Ladies, I fright them: but in faith
Kate, the elder I wax, the better I shall appear. My comfort is, that Old Age,
that ill layer up of Beauty, can do no more spoil upon my Face. Thou have
me, if thou have me, at the worst; and thou shall wear me, if thou wear me,
better and better: and therefore tell me, most fair Katherine, will you have
me? Put off your Maiden Blushes, avouch the Thoughts of your Heart with the
Looks of an Empress, take me by the Hand, and say, Harry of England, I am
thine: which Word thou shall no sooner bless mine Ear withal, but I will
tell thee alowd, England is thine, Ireland is thine, France is thine, and Henry
Plantaginet is thine; who, though I speak it before his Face, if he be not
Fellow with the best King, thou shall find the best King of Good-fellowes.
Come your Answer in broken Music; for thy Voice is Music, and thy English
broken: Therefore Queen of all, Katherine, break thy mind to me in broken
English; will thou have me


Dat is as it shall please de Roy mon pere.


Nay, it will please him well, Kate; it shall please him, Kate.


Den it fall also content me.


Upon that I kiss your Hand, and I call you my Queen.


Laisse mon Seigneur, laisse, laisse, may foy: Ie ne veus point que vous
abbaisse vostre grandeus, en baisant le main d'une nostre Seigneur indignie
seruiteur excuse moy. Ie vous supply mon tres-puissant Seigneur.


Then I will kiss your Lips, Kate.


Les Dames and Damoisels pour estre baisee deuant leur nopcese il net pas le
costume de France.


Madame, my Interpreter, what says she?


Dat it is not be de fashon pour le Ladies of France; I cannot tell wat is
buisse en Anglish


To kiss.


Your Maiestee entendre bettre que moy.


It is not a fashion for the Maids in France to kiss before they are married,
would she say


Ouy verayment.


O Kate, nice Customs cursie to great Kings. Dear Kate, you and I cannot be
confined within the weak List of a Countries fashion: we are the makers of
Manners, Kate; and the liberty that follows our Places, stoppes the mouth of
all finde-faults, as I will do yours, for upholding the nice fashion of your
Country, in denying me a Kiss: therefore patiently, and yielding. You have
Witchcraft in your Lips, Kate: there is more eloquence in a Sugar touch of
them, then in the Tongues of the French Council; and they should sooner
persuade Harry of England, then a general Petition of Monarchs. Here comes
your Father


God save your Majesty, my Royal Cousin, teach you our Princess English?


I would have her learn, my fair Cousin, how perfectly I love her, and that
is good English


Is she not apt?


Our Tongue is rough, Coze, and my Condition is not smooth: so that having
neither the Voice nor the Heart of Flattery about me, I cannot so conjure up
the Spirit of Love in her, that he will appear in his true likeness


Pardon the franknesse of my mirth, if I answer you for that. If you would
conjure in her, you must make a Circle: if conjure up Love in her in his true
likeness, he must appear naked, and blind. Can you blame her then, being a
Maid, yet ros'd over with the Virgin Crimson of Modesty, if she deny the
appearance of a naked blind Boy in her naked seeing self? It were (my Lord) a
hard Condition for a Maid to consigne to


Yet they do wink and yield, as Love is blind and enforces.


They are then excused, my Lord, when they see not what they do.


Then good my Lord, teach your Cousin to consent winking.


I will wink on her to consent, my Lord, if you will teach her to know my
meaning: for Maids well Summer'd, and warm kept, are like Flies at
Bartholomew-tyde, blind, though they have their eyes, and then they will
endure handling, which before would not abide looking on


This Moral ties me over to Time, and a hot Summer; and so I shall catch the
Fly, your Cousin, in the latter end, and she must be blind to


As Love is my Lord, before it loves.


It is so: and you may, some of you, thank Love for my blindness, who cannot
see many a fair French City for one fair French Maid that stands in my way


Yes my Lord, you see them perspectiuely: the Cities turned into a Maid; for
they are all gyrdled with Maiden Walls, that War has entered


Shall Kate be my Wife?


So please you.


I am content, so the Maiden Cities you talk of, may wait on her: so the Maid
that stood in the way for my Wish, shall show me the way to my Will


We have consented to all terms of reason.


Is It so, my Lords of England?


The King has granted every Article:
His Daughter first; and in sequel, all,
According to their firm proposed natures.

Only he has not yet subscribed this:
Where your Majesty demands, That the King of France having any occasion to
write for matter of Grant, shall name your Highness in this form, and with
this addition, in French: Nostre trescher filz Henry Roy d' Angleterre Heretere
de France: and thus in Latin; Praeclarissimus Filius noster Henricus Rex
Angliae and Here Is Franciae.
Nor this I have not Brother so denied,
But your request shall make me let it pass.

I pray you then, in love and dear alliance,
Let that one Article rank with the rest,
And thereupon give me your Daughter.

Take her fair Son, and from her blood raise up
Issue to me, that the contending Kingdoms
Of France and England, whose very shoares look pale,
With envy of each others happiness,
May cease their hatred; and this dear Conjunction
Plant Neighborhood and Christian-like accord
In their sweet Bosoms: that never War advance
His bleeding Sword 'twixt England and fair France.

Amen.


Now welcome Kate: and bear me witness all,
That here I kiss her as my Sovereign Queen.

God, the best maker of all Marriages,
Combine your hearts in one, your Realms in one:
As Man and Wife being two, are one in love,
So be there 'twixt your Kingdoms such a Spousall,
That never may ill Office, or fell Jealousy,
Which troubles often the Bed of blessed Marriage,
Thrust in between the Pation of these Kingdoms,
To make divorce of their incorporate League:
That English may as French, French Englishmen,
Receive each other. God speak this Amen.

Amen.


Prepare we for our Marriage: on which day,
My Lord of Burgundy we will take your Oath
And all the Peers, for surety of our Leagues.
Then shall I swear to Kate, and you to me,
And may our Oaths well kept and prosperous be.
Thus far with rough, and all-vnable Pen,
Our bending Author has pursued the Story,
In little room confining mighty men,
Mangling by starts the full course of their glory.
Small time: but in that small, most greatly lived
This Star of England. Fortune made his Sword;
By which, the Worlds best Garden he achieved:
And of it left his Son Imperial Lord.
Henry the Sixth, in Infant Bands crowned King
Of France and England, did this King succeed:
Whose State so many had the managing,
That they lost France, and made his England bleed:
Which often our Stage has shown; and for their sake,
In your fair minds let this acceptance take.


