AS by your high Imperial Majesty,
I had in charge at my depart for France,
As Procurator to your Excellence,
To marry Princes Margaret for your Grace;
So in the Famous Ancient City, Toures,
In presence of the Kings of France, and Sicill,
The Dukes of Orleance, Calaber, Britaigne, and Alanson,
Seven Earls, twelve Barons, and twenty reverend Bishops
I have performed my Task, and was espoused,
And humbly now upon my bended knee,
In sight of England, and her Lordly Peers,
Deliver up my Title in the Queen
To your most gracious hands, that are the Substance
Of that great Shadow I did represent:
The happiest Gift, that ever Marquess gave,
The Fairest Queen, that ever King received.

Suffolk arise. Welcome Queen Margaret,
I can express no kinder sign of Love
Then this kind kiss: O Lord, that lends me life,
Lend me a heart repleate with thankfulness:
For thou have given me in this beauteous Face
A world of earthly blessings to my soul,
If Simpathy of Love unite our thoughts.

Great King of England, and my gracious Lord,
The mutual conference that my mind has had,
By day, by night; waking, and in my dreams,
In Courtly company, or at my Beads,
With you mine Alder liefest Sovereign,
Makes me the bolder to salute my King,
With ruder terms, such as my wit affoords,
And over joy of heart does minister.

Her sight did ravish, but her grace in Speech,
Her words yclad with wisdoms Majesty,
Makes me from Wondering, fall to Weeping joys,
Such is the Fullness of my hearts content.
Lords, with one cheerful voice, Welcome my Love.

Long live Qu. Margaret, Englands happiness.


We thank you all.


My Lord Protector, so it please your Grace,
Here are the Articles of contracted peace,
Between our Sovereign, and the French King Charles,
For eighteen months concluded by consent.

Inprimis, It is agreed between the French K. Charles, and William de la Pole
Marquess of Suffolk, Ambassador for Henry King of England, That the said
Henry shall espouse the Lady Margaret, daughter unto Reignier King of Naples,
Sicillia, and Jerusalem, and Crown her Queen of England, ere the thirtieth of
May next ensuing

Item, That the Duchy of Aniou, and the County of Main, shall be released and
delivered to the King her father


Uncle, how now?


Pardon me gracious Lord,
Some sudden qualme has struck me at the heart,
And dimmed mine eyes, that I can read no further.

Uncle of Winchester, I pray read on.


Item, It is further agreed between them, That the Duchess of Aniou and
Maine, shall be released and delivered over to the King her Father, and she
sent over of the King of Englands own proper Cost and Charges, without having
any Dowry


They please us well. Lord Marquis kneel down,
We here create thee the first Duke of Suffolk,
And girt thee with the Sword. Cousin of York,
We here discharge your Grace from being Regent
IN th parts of France, till term of eighteen Months
Be full expyr'd. Thanks Uncle Winchester,
Gloucester, York, Buckingham, Somerset,
Salisburie, and Warwick.
We thank you all for this great favor done,
In entertainment to my Princely Queen.
Come, let us in, and with all speed provide
To see her Coronation be performed.

Brave Peers of England, Pillars of the State,
To you Duke Humfrey must unload his grief:
Your grief, the common grief of all the Land.
What? did my brother Henry spend his youth,
His valor, coin, and people in the wars?
Did he so often lodge in open field:
In Winters cold, and Summers parching heat,
To conquer France, his true inheritance?
And did my brother Bedford toil his wits,
To keep by policy what Henry got:
Have you your selves, Somerset, Buckingham,
Brave York, Salisbury, and victorious Warwick,
Receiud deep scarres in France and Normandy:
Or has mine Uncle Beauford, and my self,
With all the Learned Counsel of the Realm,
Studied so long, sat in the Council house,
Early and late, debating too and fro
How France and Frenchmen might be kept in awe,
And has his Highness in his infancy,
Crowned in Paris in despite of foes,
And shall these Labors, and these Honors dye?
Shall Henry's Conquest, Bedfords vigilance,
Your Deeds of War, and all our Counsel dye?
O Peers of England, shameful is this League,
Fatal this Marriage, cancelling your Fame,
Blotting your names from Books of memory,
Racing the Charracters of your Renown,
Defacing Monuments of Conquered France,
Undoing all as all had never bin.

Nephew, what means this passionate discourse?
This preroration with such circumstance:
For France, it is ours; and we will keep it still.

I Uncle, we will keep it, if we can:
But now it is impossible we should.
Suffolk, the new made Duke that rules the roast,
Has given the Duchy of Aniou and Main,
Unto the poor King Reignier, whose large style
Agrees not with the leanness of his purse.

Now by the death of him that dyed for all,
These Counties were the Keys of Normandy:
But wherefore weeps Warwick, my valiant son?

For grief that they are past recovery.
For were there hope to conquer them again,
My sword should shed hot blood, mine eyes no tears.
Aniou and Maine? My self did win them both:
Those Provinces, these Arms of mine did conquer,
And are the Cities that I got with wounds,
Delivered up again with peaceful words?
Mort Dieu.

For Suffolkes Duke, may he be suffocate,
That dims the Honor of this Warlike Isle:
France should have torn and rent my very heart,
Before I would have yielded to this League.
I never read but Englands Kings have had
Large sums of Gold, and Dowries with their wives,
And our King Henry gives away his own,
To match with her that brings no vantages.

A proper jest, and never heard before,
That Suffolk should demand a whole Fifteenth,
For Costs and Charges in transporting her:
She should have staid in France, and steru'd in France
Before --

My Lord of Gloucester, now ye grow too hot,
It was the pleasure of my Lord the King.

My Lord of Winchester I know your mind.
It Is not my speeches that you do mislike:
But it is my presence that does trouble ye,
Rancour will out, proud Prelate, in thy face
I see thy fury: If I longer stay,
We shall begin our ancient bickerings:
Lordings farewell, and say when I am gone,
I prophesied, France will be lost ere long.

So, there goes our Protector in a rage:
It Is known to you he is mine enemy:
Nay more, an enemy unto you all,
And no great friend, I fear me to the King;
Consider Lords, he is the next of blood,
And heir apparent to the English Crown:
Had Henry got an Empire by his marriage,
And all the wealthy Kingdoms of the West,
There Is reason he should be displeased at it:
Look to it Lords, let not his smoothing words
Bewitch your hearts, be wise and circumspect.
What though the common people favor him,
Calling him, Humfrey the good Duke of Gloucester,
Clapping their hands, and crying with loud voice,
Jesus maintain your Royal Excellence,
With God preserve the good Duke Humfrey:
I fear me Lords, for all this flattering gloss,
He will be found a dangerous Protector.

Why should he then protect our Sovereign?
He being of age to govern of himself.
Cousin of Somerset, join you with me,
And altogether with the Duke of Suffolk,
We Will quickly hoyse Duke Humfrey from his seat.

This weighty business will not brook delay,
I Will to the Duke of Suffolk presently.

Cousin of Buckingham, though Humfries pride
And greatness of his place be grief to us,
Yet let us watch the haughty Cardinal,
His insolence is more intolerable
Then all the Princes in the Land beside,
If Gloucester be displaced, he will be Protector.

Or thou, or I Somerset will be Protectors,
Despite Duke Humfrey, or the Cardinal.

Pride went before, Ambition follows him.
While these do labor for their own preferment,
Behooues it us to labor for the Realm.
I never saw but Humfrey Duke of Gloucester,
Did bear him like a Noble Gentleman:
Often have I seen the haughty Cardinal.
More like a Soldier then a man of the Church,
As stout and proud as he were Lord of all,
Swear like a Ruffian, and demean himself
Unlike the Ruler of a Commonweal.
Warwick my son, the comfort of my age,
Thy deeds, thy plainness, and thy housekeeping,
Has won the greatest favor of the Commons,
Excepting none but good Duke Humfrey.
And Brother York, thy Acts in Ireland,
In bringing them to civil Discipline:
Thy late exploits done in the heart of France,
When thou were Regent for our Sovereign,
Have made thee feared and honored of the people,
Join we together for the public good,
In what we can, to bridle and suppress
The pride of Suffolk, and the Cardinal,
With Somersets and Buckinghams Ambition,
And as we may, cherish Duke Humfries deeds,
While they do tend the profit of the Land.

So God help Warwick, as he loves the Land,
And common profit of his Country.

And so says York,
For he has greatest cause.

Then lets make have away,
And look unto the maine.

Unto the maine?
Oh Father, Maine is lost,
That Maine, which by maine force Warwick did win,
And would have kept, so long as breath did last:
Main-chance father you meant, but I meant Maine,
Which I will win from France, or else be slain.

Aniou and Maine are given to the French,
Paris is lost, the state of Normandy
Stands on a tickle point, now they are gone:
Suffolk concluded on the Articles,
The Peers agreed, and Henry was well pleased,
To change two Dukedomes for a Dukes fair daughter.
I cannot blame them all, what is it to them?
It Is thine they give away, and not their own.
Pirates may make cheap penyworths of their pillage,
And purchase Friends, and give to Curtezans,
Still reuelling like Lords till all be gone,
While as the silly Owner of the goods
Weeps over them, and wrings his hapless hands,
And shakes his head, and trembling stands aloof,
While all is shared, and all is borne away,
Ready to sterue, and dare not touch his own.
So York must sit* and fret, and bite his tongue,
While his own Lands are bargained for, and sold:
Me thinks the Realms of England, France, and Ireland,
Bear that proportion to my flesh and blood,
As did the fatal brand Althaea burnt,
Unto the Princes heart of Calidon:
Aniou and Maine both given unto the French?
Cold news for me: for I had hope of France,
Even as I have of fertile Englands soil.
A day will come, when York shall claim his own,
And therefore I will take the Neuils parts,
And make a show of love to proud Duke Humfrey,
And when I spy advantage, claim the Crown,
For that is the Golden mark I seek to hit:
Nor shall proud Lancaster usurp my right,
Nor hold the Scepter in his childish Fist,
Nor wear the Diadem upon his head,
Whose Church-like humors fits not for a Crown.
Then York be still awhile, till time do serve:
Watch thou, and wake when others be asleep,
To pry into the secrets of the State,
Till Henry surfeiting in joys of love,
With his new Bride, and Englands dear bought Queen,
And Humfrey with the Peers be fallen at iarres:
Then will I raise aloft the Milke-white-Rose,
With whose sweet smell the Air shall be perfumed,
And in in my Standard bear the Arms of York,
To grapple with the house of Lancaster,
And force perforce I Will make him yield the Crown,
Whose bookish Rule, has pulled fair England down.

Why droopes my Lord like ouer-ripen'd Corn,
Hanging the head at Ceres plenteous load?
Why does the Great Duke Humfrey knit his brows,
As frowning at the Favors of the world?
Why are thine eyes fixed to the sullen earth,
Gazing on that which seems to dim thy sight?
What see thou there? King Henry's Diadem,
Inchac'd with all the Honors of the world?
If so, Gaze on, and grouell on thy face,
Until thy head be circled with the same.
Put forth thy hand, reach at the glorious Gold.
What, is it too short? I Will lengthen it with mine,
And having both together heau'd it up,
We Will both together lift our heads to heaven,
And never more abase our sight so low,
As to vouchsafe one glance unto the ground.

O Nell, sweet Nell, if thou do love thy Lord,
Banish the Canker of ambitious thoughts:
And may that thought, when I imagine ill
Against my King and Nephew, virtuous Henry,
Be my last breathing in this mortal world.
My troublous dreams this night, does make me sad.

What dreamed my Lord, tell me, and I Will requite it
With sweet rehearsal of my mornings dream?

Me thought this staff mine Office-badge in Court
Was broke in twain: by whom, I have forgot,
But as I think, it was by 'th Cardinal,
And on the pieces of the broken Wand
Were placed the heads of Edmond Duke of Somerset,
And William de la Pole first Duke of Suffolk.
This was my dream, what it does bode God knows.

Tut, this was nothing but an argument,
That he that breaks a stick of Glosters grove,
Shall loose his head for his presumption.
But list to me my Humfrey, my sweet Duke:
Me thought I sat in Seat of Majesty,
In the Cathedral Church of Westminster,
And in that Chair where Kings and Queens were crowned,
Where Henry and Dame Margaret kneeled to me,
And on my head did set the Diadem.

Nay Elinor, then must I chide outright:
Presumptuous Dame, ill-nurter'd Elianor,
Art thou not second Woman in the Realm?
And the Protectors wife beloved of him?
Have thou not worldly pleasure at command,
Above the reach or compass of thy thought?
And will thou still be hammering Treachery,
To tumble down thy husband, and thy self,
From top of Honor, to Disgraces feet?
Away from me, and let me hear no more.

What, what, my Lord? Are you so chollericke
With Elianor, for telling but her dream?
Next time I Will keep my dreams unto my self,
And not be checked.

Nay be not angry, I am pleased again.


My Lord Protector, it is his Highness pleasure,
You do prepare to ride unto S. Albons,
Where as the King and Queen do mean to Hawke.

I go. Come Nel thou will ride with us?


Yes my good Lord, I Will follow presently.
Follow I must, I cannot go before,
While Gloucester bears this base and humble mind.
Were I a Man, a Duke, and next of blood,
I would remove these tedious stumbling blocks,
And smooth my way upon their headless necks.
And being a woman, I will not be slack
To play my part in Fortunes Pageant.
Where are you there? Sir John; nay fear not man,
We are alone, here is none but thee, and I.

Jesus preserve your Royal Majesty.


What say thou? Majesty: I am but Grace.


But by the grace of God, and Humes advice,
Your Graces Title shall be multiplied.

What say thou man? Have thou as yet conferred
With Margerie Iordane the cunning Witch,
With Roger Bollingbrooke the Coniuter?
And will they undertake to do me good?

This they have promised to show your Highness
A Spirit raised from depth of under ground,
That shall make answer to such Questions,
As by your Grace shall be propounded him.

It is enough, I Will think upon the Questions:
When from Saint Albones we do make return,
We Will see these things effected to the full.
Here Hume, take this reward, make merry man
With thy Confederates in this weighty cause.

Hume must make merry with the Duchess Gold:
Marry and shall: but how now, Sir John Hume?
Seal up your Lips, and give no words but Mum,
The business asks silent secrecy.
Dame Elianor gives Gold, to bring the Witch:
Gold cannot come amiss, were she a Devil.
Yet have I Gold flies from another Coast:
I dare not say, from the rich Cardinal,
And from the great and new-made Duke of Suffolk;
Yet I do find it so: for to be plain,
They (knowing Dame Elianors aspiring humor)
Have hired me to vnder-mine the Duchess,
And buzze these Coniurations in her brain.
They say, A crafty Knave does need no Broker,
Yet am I Suffolk and the Cardinals Broker.
Hume, if you take not heed, you shall go near
To call them both a pair of crafty Knaves.
Well, so it stands: and thus I fear at last,
Humes Knauerie will be the Duchess Wrack,
And her Attainture, will be Humphreyes fall:
Sort how it will, I shall have Gold for all.

My Masters, let us stand close, my Lord Protector will come this way by and by,
and then we may deliver our Supplications in the Quill


Marry the Lord protect him, for he is a good man, Jesus bless him.


Here a comes me thinks, and the Queen with him: I Will be the first sure.


Come back fool, this is the Duke of Suffolk, and not my Lord Protector.


How now fellow: would any thing with me?


I pray my Lord pardon me, I took ye for my Lord Protector.


To my Lord Protector? Are your Supplications to his Lordship? Let me see them:
what is thine


Mine is, and't please your Grace, against John Goodman, my Lord Cardinals Man,
for keeping my House, and Lands, and Wife and all, from me


Thy Wife too? that is some Wrong indeed. What Is yours? What Is here? Against
the Duke of Suffolk, for enclosing the Commons of Melforde. How now, Sir Knave


Alas Sir, I am but a poor Petitioner of our whole Towneship.


Against my Master Thomas Horner, for saying, That the Duke of York was
rightful Heir to the Crown


What say thou? Did the Duke of York say, he was rightful Heir to the
Crown


That my Mistress was? No forsooth: my Master said, That he was, and that the
King was an Usurper


Who is there?


Take this fellow in, and send for his Master with a Purseuant presently:
we will hear more of your matter before the King


And as for you that love to be protected
Under the Wings of our Protectors Grace,
Begin your Suites anew, and sue to him.
Away, base Cullions: Suffolk let them go.

Come, let us be gone.


My Lord of Suffolk, say, is this the guise?
Is this the Fashions in the Court of England?
Is this the Government of Britains I Will?
And this the Royalty of Albions King?
What, shall King Henry be a Pupil still,
Under the surly Glosters Governance?
Am I a Queen in Title and in Style,
And must be made a Subject to a Duke?
I tell thee Poole, when in the City Tours
Thou ran'st a^tilt in honor of my Love,
And stol'st away the Ladies hearts of France;
I thought King Henry had resembled thee,
In Courage, Courtship, and Proportion:
But all his mind is bent to Holiness,
To number Aue-Maries on his Beads:
His Champions, are the Prophets and Apostles,
His Weapons, holy Sawes of sacred Writ,
His Study is his Tilt-yard, and his Loves
Are brazen Images of Canonized Saints.
I would the College of the Cardinals
Would choose him Pope, and carry him to Rome,
And set the Triple Crown upon his Head;
That were a State fit for his Holiness.

Madame be patient: as I was cause
Your Highness came to England, so will I
In England work your Graces full content.

Beside the haughty Protector, have we Beauford
The imperious Churchman; Somerset, Buckingham,
And grumbling York: and not the least of these,
But can do more in England then the King.

And he of these, that can do most of all,
Cannot do more in England then the Neuils:
Salisbury and Warwick are no simple Peers.

Not all these Lords do vex me half so much,
As that proud Dame, the Lord Protectors Wife:
She sweepes it through the Court with troops of Ladies,
More like an Empress, then Duke Humphreyes Wife:
Strangers in Court, do take her for the Queen:
She bears a Dukes Revenues on her back,
And in her heart she scorns our Poverty:
Shall I not live to be aueng'd on her?
Contemptuous base-borne Callot as she is,
She vaunted amongst her Minions to other day,
The very train of her worst wearing Gown,
Was better worth then all my Fathers Lands,
Till Suffolk gave two Dukedomes for his Daughter.

Madame, my self have lym'd a Bush for her,
And placed a Quier of such enticing Birds,
That she will light to listen to the Lays,
And never mount to trouble you again.
So let her rest: and Madame list to me,
For I am bold to counsel you in this;
Although we fancy not the Cardinal,
Yet must we join with him and with the Lords,
Till we have brought Duke Humphrey in disgrace.
As for the Duke of York, this late Complaint
Will make but little for his benefit:
So one by one we will weed them all at last,
And you your self shall steer the happy Helm.

For my part, Noble Lords, I care not which,
Or Somerset, or York, all is one to me.

If York have ill demeaned himself in France,
Then let him be denay'd the Regent-ship.

If Somerset be unworthy of the Place,
Let York be Regent, I will yield to him.

Whether your Grace be worthy, yea or no,
Dispute not that, York is the worthyer.

Ambitious Warwick, let thy betters speak.


The Cardinall's not my better in the field.


All in this presence are thy betters, Warwick.


Warwick may live to be the best of all.


Peace Son, and show some reason Buckingham
Why Somerset should be preferred in this?

Because the King forsooth will have it so.


Madame, the King is old enough himself
To give his Censure: These are no Women's matters.

If he be old enough, what needs your Grace
To be Protector of his Excellence?

Madame, I am Protector of the Realm,
And at his pleasure will resign my Place.

Resign it then, and leave thine insolence.
Since thou were King; as who is King, but thou?
The Commonwealth has daily run to wrack,
The Dolphin has preuayl'd beyond the Seas,
And all the Peers and Nobles of the Realm
Have been as Bondmen to thy Sovereignty.

The Commons have thou rackt, the Clergies Bags
Are lanke and lean with thy Extortions.

Thy sumptuous Buildings, and thy Wives Attire
Have cost a mass of public Treasury.

Thy Cruelty in execution
Upon Offenders, has exceeded Law,
And left thee to the mercy of the Law.

Thy sale of Offices and Towns in France,
If they were known, as the suspect is great,
Would make thee quickly hop without thy Head.
Give me my Fan: what, Mynion, can ye not?
I cry you mercy, Madame: was it you?

Was It I? yea, I it was, proud French-woman:
Could I come near your Beauty with my Nails,
I could set my ten Commandments in your face.

Sweet Aunt be quiet, 'twas against her will.


Against her will, good King? look to it in time,
She Will hamper thee and dandle thee like a Baby:
Though in this place most Master wear no Breeches,
She shall not strike, Dame Elianor unrevenged.

Lord Cardinal, I will follow Elianor,
And listen after Humfrey, how he proceeds:
She Is tickled now, her Fume needs no spurs,
She Will gallop far enough to her destruction.

Now Lords, my Choler being ouer-blowne,
With walking once about the Quadrangle,
I come to talk of Commonwealth Affairs.
As for your spightfull false Objections,
Prove them, and I lie open to the Law:
But God in mercy so deal with my Soul,
As I in duty love my King and Country.
But to the matter that we have in hand:
I say, my Sovereign, York is meetest man
To be your Regent in the Realm of France.

Before we make election, give me leave
To show some reason, of no little force,
That York is most unmeet of any man.

I Will tell thee, Suffolk, why I am unmeet.
First, for I cannot flatter thee in Pride:
Next, if I be appointed for the Place,
My Lord of Somerset will keep me here,
Without Discharge, Money, or Furniture,
Till France be won into the Dolphins hands:
Last time I danced attendance on his will,
Till Paris was besieged, famisht, and lost.

That can I witness, and a fouler fact
Did never Traitor in the Land commit.

Peace headstrong Warwick.


Image of Pride, why should I hold my peace?


Because here is a man accused of Treason,
Pray God the Duke of York excuse himself.

Does any one accuse York for a Traitor?


What mean thou, Suffolk? tell me, what are these?


Please it your Majesty, this is the man
That does accuse his Master of High Treason;
His words were these: That Richard, Duke of York,
Was rightful Heir unto the English Crown,
And that your Majesty was an Usurper.

Say man, were these thy words?


And't shall please your Majesty, I never said nor thought any such matter:
God is my witness, I am falsely accused by the Villain


By these ten bones, my Lords, he did speak them to me in the Garret one
Night, as we were scowring my Lord of Yorkes Armor


Base Dunghill Villain, and Mechanical,
I Will have thy Head for this thy Traitors speech:
I do beseech your Royal Majesty,
Let him have all the rigor of the Law.

Alas, my Lord, hang me if ever I spoke the words: my accuser is my Prentice,
and when I did correct him for his fault the other day, he did vow upon his
knees he would be even with me: I have good witness of this; therefore I
beseech your Majesty, do not cast away an honest man for a Villains
accusation


Uncle, what shall we say to this in law?


This doom, my Lord, if I may judge:
Let Somerset be Regent over the French,
Because in York this breeds suspicion;
And let these have a day appointed them
For single Combat, in convenient place,
For he has witness of his servants malice:
This is the Law, and this Duke Humfreyes doom.

I humbly thank your Royal Majesty.


And I accept the Combat willingly.


Alas, my Lord, I cannot fight; for Gods sake pity my case: the spite of man
preuayleth against me. O Lord have mercy upon me, I shall never be able to
fight a blow: O Lord my heart


Sirrah, or you must fight, or else be hanged.


Away with them to Prison: and the day of Combat, shall be the last of the next
month. Come Somerset, we will see thee sent away


Come my Masters, the Duchess I tell you expects performance of your promises.


Master Hume, we are therefore provided: will her Ladyship behold and hear our
Exorcismes


I, what else? fear you not her courage.


I have heard her reported to be a Woman of an invincible spirit: but it shall
be convenient, Master Hume, that you be by her aloft, while we be busy below;
and so I pray you go in Gods Name, and leave us

Mother Jordan, be you prostrate, and grouell on the Earth; John Southwell
read you, and let us to our work


Well said my Masters, and welcome all: To this geere, the sooner the better.


Patience, good Lady, Wizards know their times:
Deep Night, dark Night, the silent of the Night,
The time of Night when Troy was set on fire,
The time when Screech-owles cry, and Bandogs howl,
And Spirits walk, and Ghosts break up their Graves;
That time best fits the work we have in hand.
Madame, sit you, and fear not: whom we raise,
We will make fast within a hallowed Verge.

Ad sum.


Asmath, by the eternal God,
Whose name and power thou tremblest at,
Answer that I shall ask: for till thou speak,
Thou shall not pass from hence.

Ask what thou will; that I had said, and done.


First of the King: What shall of him become?


The Duke yet lives, that Henry shall depose:
But him out-liue, and dye a violent death.

What fates await the Duke of Suffolk?


By Water shall he dye, and take his end.


What shall befall the Duke of Somerset?


Let him shun Castles,
Safer shall he be upon the sandy Plains,
Then where Castles mounted stand.
Have done, for more I hardly can endure.

Descend to Darkness, and the burning Lake:
False Fiend avoid.

Lay hands upon these Traitors, and their trash:
Beldam I think we watched you at an ynch.
What Madame, are you there? the King and Commonweal
Are deeply indebted for this piece of pains;
My Lord Protector will, I doubt it not,
See you well guerdon'd for these good deserts.

Not half so bad as thine to Englands King,
Injurious Duke, that threatest where is no cause.

True Madame, none at all: what call you this?
Away with them, let them be clapped up close,
And kept asunder: you Madame shall with us.
Stafford take her to thee.
We Will see your Trinkets here all forth-comming.
All away.

Lord Buckingham, me thinks you watched her well:
A pretty Plot, well chosen to build upon.
Now pray my Lord, let us see the Devils Writ.
What have we here?
The Duke yet lives, that Henry shall depose:
But him out-line, and dye a violent death.
Why this is just Aio Aeacida Romanos vincere posso.
Well, to the rest:
Tell me what fate awaits the Duke of Suffolk?
By Water shall he dye, and take his end.
What shall betide the Duke of Somerset?
Let him shun Castles,
Safer shall he be upon the sandy Plains,
Then where Castles mounted stand.
Come, come, my Lords,
These Oracles are hardly attained,
And hardly understood.
The King is now in progress toward Saint Albones,
With him, the Husband of this lovely Lady:
Thither goes these News,
As fast as Horse can carry them:
A sorry Breakfast for my Lord Protector.

Your Grace shall give me leave, my Lord of York,
To be the Post, in hope of his reward.

At your pleasure, my good Lord.
Who Is within there, hoe?
Inuit my Lords of Salisbury and Warwick
To suppe with me to morrow Night. Away.

Believe me Lords, for flying at the Brook,
I saw not better sport these seven years day:
Yet by your leave, the Wind was very high,
And ten to one, old Ioane had not gone out.

But what a point, my Lord, your Faulcon made,
And what a pytch she flew above the rest:
To see how God in all his Creatures works,
Yea Man and Birds are feign of climbing high.

No marvel, and it like your Majesty,
My Lord Protectors Hawks do tower so well,
They know their Master loves to be aloft,
And bears his thoughts above his Faulcons Pitch.

My Lord, it is but a base ignoble mind,
That mounts no higher then a Bird can sore:

I thought as much, he would be above the Clouds.


I my Lord Cardinal, how think you by that?
Were it not good your Grace could fly to Heaven?

The Treasury of everlasting Joy.


Thy Heaven is on Earth, thine Eyes and Thoughts
Beat on a Crown, the Treasure of thy Heart,
Pernicious Protector, dangerous Peer,
That smooth'st it so with King and Commonweal.

What, Cardinal?
Is your Priesthood grown peremptory?
Tantaene animis Coelestibus irae, Churchmen so hot?
Good Uncle hide such malice:
With such Holiness can you do it?

No malice Sir, no more then well becomes
So good a Quarrel, and so bad a Peer.

As who, my Lord?


Why, as you, my Lord,
An't like your Lordly Lords Protectorship.

Why Suffolk, England knows thine insolence.


And thy Ambition, Gloucester.


I prithee peace, good Queen,
And whet not on these furious Peers,
For bl^ (...) the Peacemakers on Earth.

(...) me be blessed for the Peace I make
Against this proud Protector with my Sword.

Faith holy Uncle, would't were come to that.


Marry, when thou dare.


Make up no factious numbers for the matter,
In thine own person answer thy abuse.

I, where thou dare not peep:
And if thou dare, this Evening,
On the East side of the Grove.

How now, my Lords?


Believe me, Cousin Gloucester,
Had not your man put up the Foul so suddenly,
We had had more sport.
Come with thy two-hand Sword.

True Uncle, are ye advised?
The East side of the Grove:
Cardinal, I am with you.

Why how now, Uncle Gloucester?


Talking of Hawking; nothing else, my Lord.
Now by Gods Mother, Priest,
I Will shave your Crown for this,
Or all my Fence shall fail.

Medice te^psum, Protector see to it well, protect your self.


The Winds grow high,
So do your Stomachs, Lords:
How irksome is this Music to my heart?
When such Strings jar, what hope of Harmony?
I pray my Lords let me compound this strife.

What means this noise?
Fellow, what Miracle do thou proclayme?

A Miracle, a Miracle.


Come to the King, and tell him what Miracle.


Forsooth, a blind man at Saint Albones Shrine,
Within this half hour has received his sight,
A man that never saw in his life before.

Now God be praised, that to believing Souls
Gives Light in Darkness, Comfort in Despair.

Here comes the Townes-men, on Procession,
To present your Highness with the man.

Great is his comfort in this Earthly Vale,
Although by his sight his sin be multiplied.

Stand by, my Masters; bring him near the King,
His Highness pleasure is to talk with him.

Good Fellow, tell us here the circumstance,
That we for thee may glorify the Lord.
What, have thou been long blind, and now restored?

Borne blind, and't please your Grace.


I indeed was he.


What Woman is this?


His Wife, and't like your Worship.


Had thou been his Mother, thou could have better told.


Where were thou borne?


At Barwick in the North, and't like your Grace.


Poor Soul,
Gods goodness has been great to thee:
Let never Day nor Night unhallowed pass,
But still remember what the Lord has done.

Tell me, good fellow,
Came thou here by Chance, or of Devotion,
To this holy Shrine?

God knows of pure Devotion,
Being called a hundred times, and oftener,
In my sleep, by good Saint Albon:
Who said; Simon, come; come offer at my Shrine,
And I will help thee.

Most true, forsooth:
And many time and often my self have heard a Voice,
To call him so.

What, art thou lame?


I, God Almighty help me.


How came thou so?


A fall off of a Tree.


A Plum-tree, Master.


How long have thou been blind?


O borne so, Master.


What, and would climb a Tree?


But that in all my life, when I was a youth.


Too true, and bought his climbing very dear.


'Masse, thou lou'dst Plummes well, that would venture so.


Alas, good Master, my Wife desired some Damsons, and made me climb, with
danger of my Life


A subtle Knave, but yet it shall not serve:
Let me see thine Eyes; winck now, now open them,
In my opinion, yet thou see not well.

Yes Master, clear as day, I thank God and Saint Albones.


Say thou me so: what Color is this Cloak of?


Red Master, Red as Blood.


Why that is well said: What Color is my Gown of?


Black forsooth, Coale-Black, as Iet.


Why then, thou know what Color Iet is of?

And yet I think, Iet did he never see.


But Cloakes and Gowns, before this day, a many.


Never before this day, in all his life.


Tell me Sirrah, what is my Name?


Alas Master, I know not.


What Is his Name?


I know not.


Nor his?


No indeed, Master.


What Is thine own Name?


Saunder Simpcoxe, and if it please you, Master.


Then Saunder, sit there,
The lying'st Knave in Christendom.
If thou had been borne blind,
Thou might as well have known all our Names,
As thus to name the several Colors we do wear.
Sight may distinguish of Colors:
But suddenly to nominate them all,
It is impossible.
My Lords, Saint Albone here has done a Miracle:
And would ye not think it, Cunning to be great,
That could restore this Cripple to his Legs again.

O Master, that you could?


My Masters of Saint Albones,
Have you not Beadles in your Town,
And Things called Whippes?

Yes, my Lord, if it please your Grace.


Then send for one presently.


Sirrah, go fetch the Beadle hither straight.


Now fetch me a Stool hither by and by.

Now Sirrah, if you mean to save your self from Whipping, leap me over this
Stool, and run away


Alas Master, I am not able to stand alone:
You go about to torture me in vain.

Well Sir, we must have you find your Legs.
Sirrah Beadle, whippe him till he leap over that same Stool.

I will, my Lord.
Come on Sirrah, off with your Doublet, quickly.

Alas Master, what shall I do? I am not able to stand.


O God, see thou this, and bear so long?


It made me laugh, to see the Villain run.


Follow the Knave, and take this Drab away.


Alas Sir, we did it for pure need.


Let the^ be whipped through every Market Town,
Till they come to Barwick, from whence they came.

Duke Humfrey has done a Miracle to day.


True: made the Lame to leap and fly away.


But you have done more Miracles then I:
You made in a day, my Lord, whole Towns to fly.

What Tidings with our Cousin Buckingham?


Such as my heart does tremble to unfold:
A sort of naughty persons, lewdly bent,
Under the Countenance and Confederacy
Of Lady Elianor, the Protectors Wife,
The Ringleader and Head of all this Rout,
Have practiced dangerously against your State,
Dealing with Witches and with Coniurers,
Whom we have apprehended in the Fact,
Raising up wicked Spirits from under ground,
Demanding of King Henry's Life and Death,
And other of your Highness Privy Council,
As more at large your Grace shall understand.

And so my Lord Protector, by this means
Your Lady is forth-comming, yet at London.
This News I think has turned your Weapons edge;
It Is like, my Lord, you will not keep your hour.

Ambitious Churchman, leave to afflict my heart:
Sorrow and grief have vanquished all my powers;
And vanquished as I am, I yield to thee,
Or to the meanest Groom.

O God, what mischiefs work the wicked ones?
Heaping confusion on their own heads thereby.

Gloucester, see here the Taincture of thy Nest,
And look thy self be faultlesse, thou were best.

Madame, for my self, to Heaven I do appease,
How I have loved my King, and Commonweal:
And for my Wife, I know not how it stands,
Sorry I am to hear what I have heard.
Noble she is: but if she have forgot
Honor and Virtue, and conuers't with such,
As like to Pytch, defile Nobility;
I banish her my Bed, and Company,
And give her as a Prey to Law and Shame,
That has dis-honored Glosters honest Name.

Well, for this Night we will repose us here:
To morrow toward London, back again,
To look into this Business thoroughly,
And call these foul Offenders to their Answers;
And poyse the Cause in Justice equal Scales,
Whose Beam stands sure, whose rightful cause preuailes.

Now my good Lords of Salisbury and Warwick,
Our simple Supper ended, give me leave,
In this close Walk, to satisfy my self,
In craving your opinion of my Title,
Which is infallible, to Englands Crown.

My Lord, I long to hear it at full.


Sweet York begin: and if thy claim be good,
The Neuills are thy Subjects to command.

Then thus:
Edward the third, my Lords, had seven Sons:
The first, Edward the Black-Prince, Prince of Wales;
The second, William of Hatfield; and the third,
Lionel, Duke of Clarence; next to whom,
Was John of Gaunt, the Duke of Lancaster;
The fifth, was Edmond Langley, Duke of York;
The sixth, was Thomas of Woodstock, Duke of Gloucester;
William of Windsor was the seventh, and last.
Edward the Black-Prince dyed before his Father,
And left behind him Richard, his only Son,
Who after Edward the third's death, reigned as King,
Till Henry Bullingbrooke, Duke of Lancaster,
The eldest Son and Heir of John of Gaunt,
Crowned by the Name of Henry the fourth,
Seized on the Realm, deposed the rightful King,
Sent his poor Queen to France, from whence she came,
And him to Pumfret; where, as all you know,
Harmless Richard was murdered traitorously.

Father, the Duke has told the truth;
Thus got the House of Lancaster the Crown.

Which now they hold by force, and not by right:
For Richard, the first Sons Heir, being dead,
The Issue of the next Son should have reigned.

But William of Hatfield dyed without an Heir.


The third Son Duke of Clarence,
From whose Line I claim the Crown,
Had Issue Phillip, a Daughter,
Who married Edmond Mortimer, Earl of March:
Edmond had Issue, Roger, Earl of March;
Roger had Issue, Edmond, Anne, and Elianor.

This Edmond, in the Reign of Bullingbrooke,
As I have read, laid claim unto the Crown,
And but for Owen Glendour, had been King;
Who kept him in Captivity, till he dyed.
But, to the rest.

His eldest Sister, Anne,
My Mother, being Heir unto the Crown,
Married Richard, Earl of Cambridge,
Who was to Edmond Langley,
Edward the thirds fifth Sons Son;
By her I claim the Kingdom:
She was Heir to Roger, Earl of March,
Who was the Son of Edmond Mortimer,
Who married Phillip, sole Daughter
Unto Lionel, Duke of Clarence.
So, if the Issue of the elder Son
Succeed before the younger, I am King.

What plain proceedings is more plain then this?
Henry does claim the Crown from John of Gaunt,
The fourth Son, York claymes it from the third:
Till Lionels Issue fayles, his should not reign.
It fayles not yet, but flourishes in thee,
And in thy Sons, fair slippes of such a Stock.
Then Father Salisbury, kneel we together,
And in this private Plot be we the first,
That shall salute our rightful Sovereign
With honor of his Birthright to the Crown.

Long live our Sovereign Richard, Englands King.


We thank you Lords:
But I am not your King, till I be Crowned,
And that my Sword be stayn'd
With heart-blood of the House of Lancaster:
And that is not suddenly to be performed,
But with advice and silent secrecy.
Do you as I do in these dangerous days,
Wink at the Duke of Saffolkes insolence,
At Beaufords Pride, at Somersets Ambition,
At Buckingham, and all the Crew of them,
Till they have snared the Shepherd of the Flock,
That virtuous Prince, the good Duke Humfrey:
It Is that they seek; and they, in seeking that,
Shall find their deaths, if York ^an prophecy.

My Lord, break we off; we know your mind at full.


My heart assures me, that the Earl of Warwick
Shall one day make the Duke of York a King.

And Neuill, this I do assure my self,
Richard shall live to make the Earl of Warwick
The greatest man in England, but the King.

Stand forth Dame Elianor Cobham, Glosters Wife:
In sight of God, and us, your guilt is great,
Receive the Sentence of the Law for sin,
Such as by Gods Book are adiudg'd to death.
You four from hence to Prison, back again;
From thence, unto the place of Execution:
The Witch in Smithfield shall be burnt to ashes,
And you three shall be strangled on the Gallows.
You Madame, for you are more Nobly-borne,
Despoyled of your Honor in your Life,
Shall, after three days open Penance done,
Live in your Country here, in Banishment,
With Sir John Stanly, in the I Will of Man.

Welcome is Banishment, welcome were my Death.


Elianor, the Law thou see has judged thee,
I cannot justify whom the Law condemns:
Mine eyes are full of tears, my heart of grief.
Ah Humfrey, this dishonor in thine age,
Will bring thy head with sorrow to the ground.
I beseech your Majesty give me leave to go;
Sorrow would sollace, and mine Age would ease.

Stay Humfrey, Duke of Gloucester,
Ere thou go, give up thy Staff,
Henry will to himself Protector be,
And God shall be my hope, my stay, my guide,
And Lantern to my feet:
And go in peace, Humfrey, no less beloved,
Then when thou were Protector to thy King.

I see no reason, why a King of years
Should be to be protected like a Child,
God and King Henry govern Englands Realm:
Give up your Staff, Sir, and the King his Realm.

My Staff? Here, Noble Henry, is my Staff:
As willingly do I the same resign,
As ere thy Father Henry made it mine;
And even as willingly at thy feet I leave it,
As others would ambitiously receive it.
Farewell good King: when I am dead, and gone,
May honorable Peace attend thy Throne.

Why now is Henry King, and Margaret Queen,
And Humfrey, Duke of Gloucester, scarce himself,
That bears so shrewd a mayme: two Pulls at once;
His Lady banished, and a Limb lopt off.
This Staff of Honor raught, there let it stand,
Where it best fits to be, in Henry's hand.

Thus droupes this lofty Pyne, and hangs his sprayes,
Thus Elianors Pride dies in her youngest days.

Lords, let him go. Please it your Majesty,
This is the day appointed for the Combat,
And ready are the Appellant and Defendant,
The Armorer and his Man, to enter the Lists,
So please your Highness to behold the fight.

I, good my Lord: for purposely therefore
Left I the Court, to see this Quarrel try'de.

A Gods Name see the Lyfts and all things fit,
Here let them end it, and God defend the right.

I never saw a fellow worse bestead,
Or more afraid to fight, then is the Appellant,
The servant of this Armorer, my Lords.

Here Neighbor Horner, I drink to you in a Cup of Sack; and fear not
Neighbor, you shall do well enough


And here Neighbor, here is a Cup of Charneco.


And here is a Pot of good Double-Beere Neighbor: drink, and fear not your Man.


Let it come in faith, and I Will pledge you all, and a fig for Peter.


Here Peter, I drink to thee, and be not afraid.


Be merry Peter, and fear not thy Master,
Fight for credit of the Prentices.

I thank you all: drink, and pray for me, I pray you, for I think I have
taken my last Draught in this World. Here Robin, and if I dye, I give thee my
Aporne; and Will, thou shall have my Hammer: and here Tom, take all the Money
that I have. O Lord bless me. I pray God, for I am never able to deal with my
Master, he has learnt so much fence already


Come, leave your drinking, and fall to blows.
Sirrah, what is thy Name?

Peter forsooth.


Peter? what more?


Thumpe.


Thumpe? Then see thou thumpe thy Master well.


Masters, I am come hither as it were upon my Man's instigation, to prove him a
Knave, and my self an honest man: and touching the Duke of York, I will take
my death, I never meant him any ill, nor the King, nor the Queen: and
therefore Peter have at thee with a downright blow


Dispatch, this Knaves tongue begins to double.
Sound Trumpets, Alarm to the Combattants.

Hold Peter, hold, I confess, I confess Treason.


Take away his Weapon: Fellow thank God, and the good Wine in thy Masters way.


O God, have I overcome mine Enemies in this presence? O Peter, thou have
preuayl'd in right


Go, take hence that Traitor from our sight,
For by his death we do perceive his guilt,
And God in Justice has revealed to us
The truth and innocence of this poor fellow,
Which he had thought to have murdered wrongfully.
Come fellow, follow us for thy Reward.

Thus sometimes has the brightest day a Cloud:
And after Summer, evermore succeedes
Barren Winter, with his wrathful nipping Cold;
So Cares and Joys abound, at Seasons fleet.
Sirs, what is a Clock?

Ten, my Lord.


Ten is the hour that was appointed me,
To watch the coming of my punished Duchess:
Uneath may she endure the Flintie Streets,
To tread them with her tender-feeling feet.
Sweet Nell, ill can thy Noble Mind abrooke
The abject People, gazing on thy face,
With envious Looks laughing at thy shame,
That erst did follow thy proud Chariot-Wheeles,
When thou did ride in triumph through the streets.
But soft, I think she comes, and I Will prepare
My teare-stayn'd eyes, to see her Miseries.

So please your Grace, we will take her from the Sheriff.


No, stir not for your lives, let her pass by.


Come you, my Lord, to see my open shame?
Now thou do Penance too. Look how they gaze,
See how the giddy multitude do point,
And nodde their heads, and throw their eyes on thee.
Ah Gloucester, hide thee from their hateful looks,
And in thy Closet pent up, rue my shame,
And banne thine Enemies, both mine and thine.

Be patient, gentle Nell, forget this grief.


Ah Gloucester, teach me to forget my self:
For whilst I think I am thy married Wife,
And thou a Prince, Protector of this Land,
Me thinks I should not thus be led along,
Mayl'd up in shame, with Papers on my back,
And followed with a Rabble, that rejoice
To see my tears, and hear my deepe-fet groans.
The ruthlesse Flint does cut my tender feet,
And when I start, the envious people laugh,
And bid me be advised how I tread.
Ah Humfrey, can I bear this shameful yoke?
Trowest thou, that ere I Will look upon the World,
Or count them happy, that enioyes the Sun?
No: Dark shall be my Light, and Night my Day.
To think upon my Pomp, shall be my Hell.
Sometime I Will say, I am Duke Humfreyes Wife,
And he a Prince, and Ruler of the Land:
Yet so he ruled, and such a Prince he was,
As he stood by, whilst I, his forlorn Duchess,
Was made a wonder, and a pointing stock
To every idle Rascal follower.
But be thou mild, and blush not at my shame,
Nor stir at nothing, till the Axe of Death
Hang over thee, as sure it shortly will.
For Suffolk, he that can do all in all
With her, that hates thee and hates us all,
And York, and impious Beauford, that false Priest,
Have all lym'd Bushes to betray thy Wings,
And fly thou how thou can, they will tangle thee.
But fear not thou, until thy foot be snared,
Nor never seek prevention of thy foes.

Ah Nell, forbear: thou aymest all awry.
I must offend, before I be attainted:
And had I twenty times so many foes,
And each of them had twenty times their power,
All these could not procure me any scathe,
So long as I am loyal, true, and crimelesse.
Would have me rescue thee from this reproach?
Why yet thy scandal were not wipt away,
But I in danger for the breach of Law.
Thy greatest help is quiet, gentle Nell:
I pray thee sort thy heart to patience,
These few days wonder will be quickly worn:

I summon your Grace to his Majesty's Parliament,
Holden at Bury, the first of this next Month.

And my consent never asked herein before?
This is close dealing. Well, I will be there.
My Nell, I take my leave: and Master Sheriff,
Let not her Penance exceed the Kings Commission.

And't please your Grace, here my Commission stays:
And Sir John Stanly is appointed now,
To take her with him to the I Will of Man.

Must you, Sir John, protect my Lady here?


So am I given in charge, may't please your Grace.


Entreat her not the worse, in that I pray
You use her well: the World may laugh again,
And I may live to do you kindness, if you do it her.
And so Sir John, farewell.

What, gone my Lord, and bid me not farewell?


Witness my tears, I cannot stay to speak.


Art thou gone to? all comfort go with thee,
For none abides with me: my Joy, is Death;
Death, at whose Name I often have been afear'd,
Because I wished this Worlds eternity.
Stanley, I prithee go, and take me hence,
I care not whither, for I beg no favor;
Only convey me where thou art commanded.

Why, Madame, that is to the I Will of Man,
There to be used according to your State.

That Is bad enough, for I am but reproach:
And shall I then be used reproachfully?

Like to a Duchess, and Duke Humfreyes Lady,
According to that State you shall be used.

Sheriff farewell, and better then I fare,
Although thou have been Conduct of my shame.

It is my Office, and Madame pardon me.


I, I, farewell, thy Office is discharged:
Come Stanley, shall we go?

Madame, your Penance done,
Throw off this Sheet,
And go we to attire you for our Journey.

My shame will not be shifted with my Sheet:
No, it will hang upon my richest Robes,
And show it self, attire me how I can.
Go, lead the way, I long to see my Prison.

I muse my Lord of Gloucester is not come:
It Is not his wont to be the hindmost man,
What e're occasion keeps him from us now.

Can you not see? or will ye not observe
The strangeness of his altered Countenance?
With what a Majesty he bears himself,
How insolent of late he is become,
How proud, how peremptory, and unlike himself.
We know the time since he was mild and affable,
And if we did but glance a farre-off Look,
Immediately he was upon his Knee,
That all the Court admired him for submission.
But meet him now, and be it in the Morn,
When every one will give the time of day,
He knits bis Brow, and shows an angry Eye,
And passes by with stiff vnbowed Knee,
Disdaining duty that to us belongs.
Small Curres are not regarded when they grynne,
But great men tremble when the Lion rores,
And Humfrey is no little Man in England.
First note, that he is near you in descent,
And should you fall, he is the next will mount.
Me seems then, it is no Policy,
Respecting what a rancorous mind he bears,
And his advantage following your decease,
That he should come about your Royal Person,
Or be admitted to your Highness Council.
By flattery has he won the Commons hearts:
And when he please to make Commotion,
It Is to be feared they all will follow him.
Now it is the Spring, and Weeds are shallow-rooted,
Suffer them now, and they will o're-grow the Garden,
And choke the Herbs for want of Husbandry.
The reverent care I bear unto my Lord,
Made me collect these dangers in the Duke.
If it be fond, call it a Woman's fear:
Which fear, if better Reasons can supplant,
I will subscribe; and say I wronged the Duke.
My Lord of Suffolk, Buckingham, and York,
Reprove my allegation, if you can,
Or else conclude my words effectual.

Well has your Highness seen into this Duke:
And had I first been put to speak my mind,
I think I should have told your Graces Tale.
The Duchess, by his subornation,
Upon my Life began her devilish practices:
Or if he were not privy to those Faults,
Yet by reputing of his high descent,
As next the King, he was successiue Heir,
And such high vaunts of his Nobility,
Did instigate the Bedlam braine-sick Duchess,
By wicked means to frame our Sovereigns fall.
Smooth runs the Water, where the Brook is deep,
And in his simple show he harbors Treason.
The Fox barks not, when he would steal the Lamb.
No, no, my Sovereign, Glouster is a man
Unsounded yet, and full of deep deceit.

Did he not, contrary to form of Law,
Devise strange deaths, for small offenses done?

And did he not, in his Protectorship,
Levy great sums of Money through the Realm,
For Soldiers pay in France, and never sent it?
By means whereof, the Towns each day revolted.

Tut, these are petty faults to faults unknown,
Which time will bring to light in smooth Duke Humfrey.

My Lords at once: the care you have of us,
To mow down Thorns that would annoy our Foot,
Is worthy praise: but shall I speak my conscience,
Our Kinsman Gloucester is as innocent,
From meaning Treason to our Royal Person,
As is the sucking Lamb, or harmless Done:
The Duke is virtuous, mild, and too well given,
To dream on evil, or to work my downfall.

Ah what is more dangerous, then this fond affiance?
Seems he a Dove? his feathers are but borrowed,
For he is disposed as the hateful Raven.
Is he a Lamb? his Skin is surely lent him,
For he is inclined as is the ravenous* Wolves.
Who cannot steal a shape, that means deceit?
Take heed, my Lord, the welfare of us all,
Hangs on the cutting short that fraudfull man.

All health unto my gracious Sovereign.


Welcome Lord Somerset: What News from France?


That all your Interest in those Territories,
Is utterly bereft you: all is lost.

Cold News, Lord Somerset: but Gods will be done.


Cold News for me: for I had hope of France,
As firmly as I hope for fertile England.
Thus are my Blossoms blasted in the Bud,
And Caterpillars eat my Leaves away:
But I will remedy this gear ere long,
Or sell my Title for a glorious Grave.

All happiness unto my Lord the King:
Pardon, my Liege, that I have stayed so long.

Nay Gloucester, know that thou art come too soon,
Unless thou were more loyal then thou art:
I do arrest thee of High Treason here.

Well Suffolk, thou shall not see me blush,
Nor change my Countenance for this Arrest:
A Heart unspotted, is not easily daunted.
The purest Spring is not so free from mudde,
As I am clear from Treason to my Sovereign.
Who can accuse me? wherein am I guilty?

It Is thought, my Lord,
That you took Bribes of France,
And being Protector, stayed the Soldiers pay,
By means whereof, his Highness has lost France.

Is it but thought so?
What are they that think it?
I never robbed the Soldiers of their pay,
Nor ever had one penny Bribe from France.
So help me God, as I have watched the Night,
I, Night by Night, in studying good for England.
That Doyt that ere I wrested from the King,
Or any Groat I hoorded to my use,
Be brought against me at my Trial day.
No: many a Pound of mine own proper store,
Because I would not tax the needy Commons,
Have I dis-pursed to the Garrisons,
And never asked for restitution.

It serves you well, my Lord, to say so much.


I say no more then truth, so help me God.


In your Protectorship, you did devise
Strange Tortures for Offenders, never heard of,
That England was defamed by Tyranny.

Why it is well known, that whiles I was Protector,
Pity was all the fault that was in me:
For I should melt at an Offenders tears,
And lowly words were Ransom for their fault:
Unless it were a bloody Murderer,
Or foul felonious Thief, that fleeced poor passengers,
I never gave them condign punishment.
Murder indeed, that bloody sin, I tortured
Above the Felon, or what Trespass else.

My Lord, these faults are easy, quickly answered:
But mightier Crimes are laid unto your charge,
Whereof you cannot easily purge your self.
I do arrest you in his Highness Name,
And here commit you to my Lord Cardinal
To keep, until your further time of Trial.

My Lord of Gloucester, it is my special hope,
That you will clear your self from all suspense,
My Conscience tells me you are innocent.

Ah gracious Lord, these days are dangerous:
Virtue is choakt with foul Ambition,
And Charity chased hence by Rancours hand;
Foul Subornation is predominant,
And Equity exiled your Highness Land.
I know, their Complot is to have my Life:
And if my death might make this Island happy,
And prove the Period of their Tyranny,
I would expend it with all willingness,
But mine is made the Prologue to their Play:
For thousands more, that yet suspect no peril,
Will not conclude their plotted Tragedy.
Beaufords red sparkling eyes blab his hearts malice,
And Suffolks cloudie Brow his stormy hate;
Sharp Buckingham vnburthens with his tongue,
The envious Load that lies upon his heart:
And dogged York, that reaches at the Moon,
Whose ouer-weening Arm I have pluckt-back,
By false accuse does level at my Life.
And you, my Sovereign Lady, with the rest,
Causeless have laid disgraces on my head,
And with your best endeavor have stirred up
My liefest Liege to be mine Enemy:
I, all of you have laid your heads together,
My self had notice of your Conuenticles,
And all to make away my guiltless Life.
I shall not want false Witness, to condemn me,
Nor store of Treasons, to augment my guilt:
The ancient Proverb will be well effected,
A Staff is quickly found to beat a Dog.

My Liege, his railing is intolerable.
If those that care to keep your Royal Person
From Treasons secret Knife, and Traitors Rage,
Be thus vpbrayded, chid, and rated at,
And the Offender granted scope of speech,
'Twill make them cool in zeal unto your Grace.

Has he not twit our Sovereign Lady here
With ignominious words, though Clarkely coucht?
As if she had suborned some to swear
False allegations, to overthrow his state.

But I can give the loser leave to chide.


Far truer spoke then meant: I lose indeed,
Beshrew the winners, for they played me false,
And well such losers may have leave to speak.

He Will wrest the sense, and hold us here all day.
Lord Cardinal, he is your Prisoner.

Sirs, take away the Duke, and guard him sure.


Ah, thus King Henry throws away his Crutch,
Before his Legs be firm to bear his Body.
Thus is the Shepherd beaten from thy side,
And Wolves are gnarling, who shall gnaw thee first.
Ah that my fear were false, ah that it were;
For good King Henry, thy decay I fear.

My Lords, what to your wisdoms seems best,
Do, or undo, as if our self were here.

What, will your Highness leave the Parliament?


I Margaret: my heart is drowned with grief,
Whose flood begins to flow within mine eyes;
My Body round engyrt with misery:
For what is more miserable then Discontent?
Ah Uncle Humfrey, in thy face I see
The Map of Honor, Truth, and Loyalty:
And yet, good Humfrey, is the hour to come,
That ere I proved thee false, or feared thy faith.
What lowering Star now enuies thy estate?
That these great Lords, and Margaret our Queen,
Do seek subversion of thy harmless Life.
Thou never did them wrong, nor no man wrong:
And as the Butcher takes away the Calfe,
And binds the Wretch, and beats it when it strayes,
Bearing it to the bloody Slaughterhouse;
Even so remorselesse have they borne him hence:
And as the Damme runs lowing up and down,
Looking the way her harmless young one went,
And can do naught but wayle her Darlings loss;
Even so my self bewayles good Glosters case
With sad vnhelpefull tears, and with dimn'd eyes;
Look after him, and cannot do him good:
So mighty are his vowed Enemies.
His fortunes I will weep, and 'twixt each groan,
Say, who is a Traitor? Gloucester he is none.

Free Lords:
Cold Snow melts with the Suns hot Beams:
Henry, my Lord, is cold in great Affairs,
Too full of foolish pity: and Glosters show
Beguiles him, as the mournful Crocodile
With sorrow snares relenting passengers;
Or as the Snake, rolled in a flowring Bank,
With shining checkered slough does sting a Child,
That for the beauty thinks it excellent.
Believe me Lords, were none more wise then I,
And yet herein I judge mine own Wit good;
This Gloucester should be quickly rid the World,
To rid us from the fear we have of him.

That he should dye, is worthy policy,
But yet we want a Color for his death:
It Is meet he be condemned by course of Law.

But in my mind, that were no policy:
The King will labor still to save his Life,
The Commons happily rise, to save his Life;
And yet we have but triuiall argument,
More then mistrust, that shows him worthy death.

So that by this, you would not have him dye.


Ah York, no man alive, so feign as I.


It Is York that has more reason for his death.
But my Lord Cardinal, and you my Lord of Suffolk,
Say as you think, and speak it from your Souls:
Were not all one, an empty Eagle were set,
To guard the Chicken from a hungry Kyte,
As place Duke Humfrey for the Kings Protector?

So the poor Chicken should be sure of death.


Madame it is true: and were not madness then,
To make the Fox surueyor of the Fold?
Who being accused a crafty Murderer,
His guilt should be but idly posted over,
Because his purpose is not executed.
No: let him dye, in that he is a Fox,
By nature proved an Enemy to the Flock,
Before his Chaps be stayn'd with Crimson blood,
As Humfrey proved by Reasons to my Liege.
And do not stand on Quillets how to slay him:
Be it by Gynnes, by Snares, by Subtletie,
Sleeping, or Waking, it is no matter how,
So he be dead; for that is good deceit,
Which mates him first, that first intends deceit,

Thrice Noble Suffolk, it is resolutely spoke.


Not resolute, except so much were done,
For things are often spoke, and seldom meant,
But that my heart accords with my tongue,
Seeing the deed is meritorious,
And to preserve my Sovereign from his Foe,
Say but the word, and I will be his Priest.

But I would have him dead, my Lord of Suffolk,
Ere you can take due Orders for a Priest:
Say you consent, and censure well the deed,
And I Will provide his Executioner,
I tender so the safety of my Liege.

Here is my Hand, the deed is worthy doing.


And so say I.


And I: and now we three have spoke it,
It skills not greatly who impugnes our doom.

Great Lords, from Ireland am I come amain,
To signify, that Rebels there are up,
And put the Englishmen unto the Sword.
Send Succors (Lords) and stop the Rage betime,
Before the Wound do grow incurable;
For being green, there is great hope of help.

A Breach that craves a quick expedient stop.
What counsel give you in this weighty cause?

That Somerset be sent as Regent thither:
It Is meet that luckie Ruler be employed,
Witness the fortune he has had in France.

If York, with all his farre-fet policy,
Had been the Regent there, in stead of me,
He never would have stayed in France so long.

No, not to lose it all, as thou have done,
I rather would have lost my Life betimes,
Then bring a burden of dis-honour home,
By staying there so long, till all were lost.
Show me one skarre, charactered on thy Skin,
Men's flesh preserved so whole, do seldom win.

Nay then, this spark will prove a raging fire,
If Wind and Fuel be brought, to feed it with:
No more, good York; sweet Somerset be still.
Thy fortune, York, had thou been Regent there,
Might happily have proved far worse then his.

What, worse then naught? nay, then a shame take all.


And in the number, thee, that wishest shame.


My Lord of York, try what your fortune is:
The uncivil Kernes of Ireland are in Arms,
And temper Clay with blood of Englishmen.
To Ireland will you lead a Band of men,
Collected choycely, from each County some,
And try your hap against the Irishmen*

I will, my Lord, so please his Majesty.


Why, our Authority is his consent,
And what we do establish, he confirms:
Then, Noble York, take thou this Task in hand.

I am content: Provide me Soldiers, Lords,
Whiles I take order for mine own affairs.

A charge, Lord York, that I will see performed.
But now return we to the false Duke Humfrey.

No more of him: for I will deal with him,
That henceforth he shall trouble us no more:
And so break off, the day is almost spent,
Lord Suffolk, you and I must talk of that event.

My Lord of Suffolk, within fourteen days
At Bristow I expect my Soldiers,
For there I Will ship them all for Ireland.

I Will see it truly done, my Lord of York.


Now York, or never, steel thy fearful thoughts,
And change misdoubt to resolution;
Be that thou hop'st to be, or what thou art;
Resign to death, it is not worth the enjoying:
Let pale-fac't fear keep with the meane-borne man,
And find no harbor in a Royal heart.
Faster the^ Springtime showers, comes thought on thought,
And not a thought, but thinks on Dignity.
My Brain, more busy then the laboring Spider,
Weaues tedious Snares to trap mine Enemies.
Well Nobles, well: it is politikely done,
To send me packing with an Host of men:
I fear me, you but warm the starued Snake,
Who cherisht in your breasts, will sting your hearts.
'Twas men I lackt, and you will give them me;
I take it kindly: yet be well assured,
You put sharp Weapons in a mad-mans hands.
Whiles I in Ireland nourish a mighty Band,
I will stir up in England some black Storm,
Shall blow ten thousand Souls to Heaven, or Hell:
And this fell Tempest shall not cease to rage,
Until the Golden Circuit on my Head,
Like to the glorious Suns transparant Beams,
Do calm the fury of this mad-bred Flawe.
And for a minister of my intent,
I have seduced a headstrong Kentishman,
John Cade of Ashford,
To make Commotion, as full well he can,
Under the Title of John Mortimer.
In Ireland have I seen this stubborn Cade
Oppose himself against a Troop of Kernes,
And fought so long, till that his thighs with Darts
Were almost like a sharpe-quill'd Porpentine:
And in the end being rescued, I have seen
Him capre upright, like a wild Morisco,
Shaking the bloody Darts, as he his Bells.
Full often, like a shag-hayr'd crafty Kerne,
Has he conuersed with the Enemy,
And vndiscouer'd, come to me again,
And given me notice of their Villainies.
This Devil here shall be my substitute;
For that John Mortimer, which now is dead,
In face, in gate, in speech he does resemble.
By this, I shall perceive the Commons mind,
How they affect the House and Clay^e of York.
Say he be taken, rackt, and tortured;
I know, no pain they can inflict upon him,
Will make him say, I moved him to those Arms.
Say that he thrive, as it is great like he will,
Why then from Ireland come I with my strength,
And reap the Harvest which that Rascal sowed.
For Humfrey; being dead, as he shall be,
And Henry put apart: the next for me.

Run to my Lord of Suffolk: let him know
We have dispatched the Duke, as he commanded*

Oh, that it were to do: what have we done?
Did ever hear a man so penitent?

Here comes my Lord.


Now Sirs, have you dispatched this thing?


I, my good Lord, he is dead.


Why that is well said. Go, get you to my House,
I will reward you for this venturous deed:
The King and all the Peers are here at hand.
Have you laid fair the Bed? Is all things well,
According as I gave directions?

It Is, my good Lord.


Away, be gone.


Go call our Uncle to our presence straight:
Say, we intend to try his Grace to day,
If he be guilty, as it is published.

I Will call him presently, my Noble Lord.


Lords take your places: and I pray you all
Proceed no straiter against our Uncle Gloucester,
Then from true evidence, of good esteem,
He be approved in practice culpable.

God forbid any Malice should prevail,
That faultlesse may condemn a Noble man:
Pray God he may acquit him of suspicion.

I thank thee Nell, these words content me much.

How now? why look thou pale? why tremblest thou?
Where is our Uncle? what is the matter, Suffolk?

Dead in his Bed, my Lord: Gloucester is dead.


Marry God forfend.


Gods secret Judgment: I did dream to Night,
The Duke was dumb, and could not speak a word.

How fares my Lord? Help Lords, the King is dead.


Rere up his Body, wring him by the Nose.


Run, go, help, help: Oh Henry open thine eyes.


He does revive again, Madame be patient.


Oh Heavenly God.


How fares my gracious Lord?


Comfort my Sovereign, gracious Henry comfort.


What, does my Lord of Suffolk comfort me?
Came he right now to sing a Ravens Note,
Whose dismal tune bereft my Vital powers:
And thinks he, that the chirping of a Wren,
By crying comfort from a hollow breast,
Can chase away the first-conceiued sound?
Hide not thy poison with such sugared words,
Lay not thy hands on me: forbear I say,
Their touch affrights me as a Serpents sting.
Thou balefull Messenger, out of my sight:
Upon thy eye balls, murderous Tyranny
Sits in grim Majesty, to fright the World.
Look not upon me, for thine eyes are wounding;
Yet do not go away: come Basiliske,
And kill the innocent gazer with thy sight:
For in the shade of death, I shall find joy;
In life, but double death, now Gloster's dead.

Why do you rate my Lord of Suffolk thus?
Although the Duke was enemy to him,
Yet he most Christian-like laments his death:
And for my self, Foe as he was to me,
Might liquid tears, or heart-offending groans,
Or blood-consuming sighs recall his Life;
I would be blind with weeping, sick with groans,
Look pale as Prim-rose with blood-drinking sighs,
And all to have the Noble Duke alive.
What know I how the world may deem of me?
For it is known we were but hollow Friends:
It may be judged I made the Duke away,
So shall my name with Slanders tongue be wounded,
And Princes Courts be filled with my reproach:
This get I by his death: Aye me unhappy,
To be a Queen, and Crowned with infamy.

Ah woe is me for Gloucester, wretched man.


Be woe for me, more wretched then he is.
What, Do thou turn away, and hide thy face?
I am no loathsome Leaper, look on me.
What? Art thou like the Adder waxen deaf?
Be poisonous too, and kill thy forlorn Queen.
Is all thy comfort shut in Glosters Tomb?
Why then Dame Elianor was near thy joy.
Erect his Statue, and worship it,
And make my Image but an Alehouse sign.
Was I for this nigh wracked upon the Sea,
And twice by awkward wind from Englands bank
Drove back again unto my Native Clime.
What boaded this? but well fore-warning wind
Did seem to say, seek not a Scorpions Nest,
Nor set no footing on this unkind Shore.
What did I then? But cursed the gentle gusts,
And he that loosed them forth their Brazen Caves,
And bid them blow toward Englands blessed shore,
Or turn our Stern upon a dreadful Rock:
Yet Aeolus would not be a murderer,
But left that hateful office unto thee.
The pretty vaulting Sea refused to drown me,
Knowing that thou would have me drowned on shore
With tears as salt as Sea, through thy unkindness.
The splitting Rocks cowr'd in the sinking sands,
And would not dash me with their ragged sides,
Because thy flinty heart more hard then they,
Might in thy Palace, perish Elianor.
As far as I could ken thy Chalky Cliffes,
When from thy Shore, the Tempest beat us back,
I stood upon the Hatches in the storm:
And when the duskie sky, began to rob
My earnest-gaping-sight of thy Lands view,
I took a costly Jewel from my neck,
A Heart it was bound in with Diamonds,
And threw it toward thy Land: The Sea received it,
And so I wished thy body might my Heart:
And even with this, I lost fair Englands view,
And bid mine eyes be packing with my Heart,
And called them blind and duskie Spectacles,
For loosing ken of Albions wished Coast.
How often have I tempted Suffolkes tongue
(The agent of thy foul inconstancy)
To sit and watch me as Ascanius did,
When he to madding Dido would unfold
His Fathers Acts, commenced in burning Troy.
Am I not witcht like her? Or thou not false like him?
Aye me, I can no more: Dye Elinor,
For Henry weeps, that thou do live so long.

It is reported, mighty Sovereign,
That good Duke Humfrey Traitorously is murdered
By Suffolk, and the Cardinal Beaufords means:
The Commons like an angry Hiue of Bees
That want their Leader, scatter up and down,
And care not who they sting in his revenge.
My self have calmed their spleenfull mutiny,
Until they hear the order of his death.

That he is dead good Warwick, it is too true,
But how he dyed, God knows, not Henry:
Enter his Chamber, view his breathless Corpse,
And comment then upon his sudden death.

That shall I do my Liege; Stay Salsburie
With the rude multitude, till I return.

O thou that iudgest all things, stay my thoghts;
My thoughts, that labor to persuade my soul,
Some violent hands were laid on Humfries life:
If my suspect be false, forgive me God,
For judgment only does belong to thee:
Feign would I go to chafe his palie lips,
With twenty thousand kisses, and to draine
Upon his face an Ocean of salt tears,
To tell my love unto his dumb deaf trunk,
And with my fingers feel his hand, unfeeling:
But all in vain are these mean Obsequies,
And to survey his dead and earthy Image:
What were it but to make my sorrow greater?

Come hither gracious Sovereign, view this body.


That is to see how deep my grave is made,
For with his soul fled all my worldly solace:
For seeing him, I see my life in death.

As surely as my soul intends to live
With that dread King that took our state upon him,
To free us from his Fathers wrathful curse,
I do believe that violent hands were laid
Upon the life of this thrice-famed Duke.

A dreadful Oath, sworn with a solemn tongue:
What instance gives Lord Warwick for his vow.

See how the blood is settled in his face.
Often have I seen a timely-parted Ghost,
Of ashy semblance, meager, pale, and bloodlesse,
Being all descended to the laboring heart,
Who in the Conflict that it holds with death,
Attracts the same for aydance against the enemy,
Which with the heart there cooles, and never returns,
To blush and beautify the Cheek again.
But see, his face is black, and full of blood:
His eye-balles further out, than when he lived,
Staring full ghastly, like a strangled man:
His hair up reared, his nostrils stretched with struggling:
His hands abroad displayed, as one that graspt
And tugged for Life, and was by strength subdude.
Look on the sheets his hair (you see) is sticking,
His well proportioned Beard, made ruff and rugged,
Like to the Summers Come by Tempest lodged:
It cannot be but he was murdered here,
The least of all these signs were probable.

Why Warwick, who should do the D. to death?
My self and Beauford had him in protection,
And we I hope sir, are no murderers.

But both of you were vowed D. Humfries foes,
And you (forsooth) had the good Duke to keep:
It Is like you would not feast him like a friend,
And it is well seen, he found an enemy.

Than you belike suspect these Noblemen,
As guilty of Duke Humfries timelesse death.

Who finds the Heyfer dead, and bleeding fresh,
And sees fast-by, a Butcher with an Axe,
But will suspect, 'twas he that made the slaughter?
Who finds the Partridge in the Puttocks Nest,
But may imagine how the Bird was dead,
Although the Kyte soar with vnbloudied Beak?
Even so suspicious is this Tragedy.

Are you the Butcher, Suffolk? where is your Knife?
Is Beauford termed a Kyte? where are his Tallons?

I wear no Knife, to slaughter sleeping men,
But here is a vengefull Sword, rusted with ease,
That shall be scowred in his rancorous heart,
That slanders me with Murders Crimson Badge.
Say, if thou dare, proud Lord of Warwickshire,
That I am faulty in Duke Humfreyes death.

What dares not Warwick, if false Suffolk dare him?


He dares not calm his contumelious Spirit,
Nor cease to be an arrogant Controller,
Though Suffolk dare him twenty thousand times.

Madame be still: with reverence may I say,
For every word you speak in his behalf,
Is slander to your Royal Dignity.

Blunt-witted Lord, ignoble in demeanor,
If ever Lady wronged her Lord so much,
Thy Mother took into her blamefull Bed
Some stern vntutur'd Churl; and Noble Stock
Was graft with Crab-tree slip, whose Fruit thou art,
And never of the Neuils Noble Race.

But that the guilt of Murder bucklers thee,
And I should rob the Deaths-man of his Fee,
Quitting thee thereby of ten thousand shames,
And that my Sovereigns presence makes me mild,
I would, false murderous Coward, on thy Knee
Make thee beg pardon for thy passed speech,
And say, it was thy Mother that thou meant'st,
That thou thy self wast borne in Bastardie;
And after all this fearful Homage done,
Give thee thy hyre, and send thy Soul to Hell,
Pernicious blood-sucker of sleeping men.

Thou shall be waking, while I shed thy blood,
If from this presence thou dare go with me.

Away even now, or I will drag thee hence:
Unworthy though thou art, I Will cope with thee,
And do some service to Duke Humfreyes Ghost.

What stronger Breast Plate then a heart untainted?
Thrice is he armed, that has his Quarrel just;
And he but naked, though locked up in Steel,
Whose Conscience with Injustice is corrupted.

What noise is this?


Why how now Lords?
Your wrathful Weapons drawn,
Here in our presence? Dare you be so bold?
Why what tumultuous clamor have we here?

The trayt'rous Warwick, with the men of Bury,
Set all upon me, mighty Sovereign.

Sirs stand apart, the King shall know your mind.
Dread Lord, the Commons send you word by me,
Unless Lord Suffolk straight be done to death,
Or banished fair Englands Territories,
They will by violence tear him from your Palace,
And torture him with grievous lingering death.
They say, by him the good Duke Humfrey died:
They say, in him they fear your Highness death;
And mere instinct of Love and Loyalty,
Free from a stubborn opposite intent,
As being thought to contradict your liking,
Makes them thus forward in his Banishment.
They say, in care of your most Royal Person,
That if your Highness should intend to sleep,
And charge, that no man should disturb your rest,
In pain of your dislike, or pain of death;
Yet notwithstanding such a strait Edict,
Were there a Serpent seen, with forked Tongue,
That slyly glyded toward your Majesty,
It were but necessary you were wak't:
Least being suffered in that harmefull slumber,
The mortal Worm might make the sleep eternal.
And therefore do they cry, though you forbid,
That they will guard you, where you will, or no,
From such fell Serpents as false Suffolk is;
With whose inuenomed and fatal sting,
Your loving Uncle, twenty times his worth,
They say is shamefully bereft of life.

An answer from the King, my Lord of Salisbury.


It Is like the Commons, rude unpolished Hindes,
Could send such Message to their Sovereign:
But you, my Lord, were glad to be employed,
To show how queint an Orator you are.
But all the Honor Salisbury has won,
Is, that he was the Lord Ambassador,
Sent from a sort of Tinkers to the King.

An answer from the King, or we will all break in.


Go Salisbury* and tell them all from me,
I thank them for their tender loving care;
And had I not been cited so by them,
Yet did I purpose as they do entreat:
For sure, my thoughts do hourly prophecy,
Mischance unto my State by Suffolkes means.
And therefore by his Majesty I swear,
Whose farre-vnworthie Deputy I am,
He shall not breathe infection in this air,
But three days longer, on the pain of death.

Oh Henry, let me plead for gentle Suffolk.


Ungentle Queen, to call him gentle Suffolk.
No more I say^ if thou do plead for him,
Thou will but add increase unto my Wrath.
Had I but said, I would have kept my Word;
But when I swear, it is irreuocable:
If after three days space thou here be found,
On any ground that I am Ruler of,
The World shall not be Ransom for thy Life.
Come Warwick* come good Warwick, go with me,
I have great matters to impart to thee.

Mischance and Sorrow go along with you,
Hearts Discontent, and sour Affliction,
Be play-fellowes to keep you company:
There Is two of you, the Devil make a third,
And threefold Vengeance tend upon your steps.

Cease, gentle Queen, these Execrations,
And let thy Suffolk take his heavy leave.

Fie Coward woman, and soft har^ed wretch,
Have thou not spirit to curse thine enemy.

A plague upon them: wherefore should I curse them?
Would curses kill, as does the Mandrakes groan,
I would invent as bitter searching terms,
As cursed, as harsh, and horrible to hear,
Delivered strongly through my fixed teeth,
With full as many fignes of deadly hate,
As leane-fac'd envy in her loathsome cave.
My tongue should stumble in mine earnest words,
Mine eyes should sparkle like the beaten Flint,
Mine hair be fixed an end, as one distract:
I, every joint should seem to curse and ban,
And even now my burdened heart would break
Should I not curse them. Poison be their drink.
Gall, worse then Gall, the daintiest that they taste:
Their sweetest shade, a grove of Cypress Trees:
Their cheifest Prospect, murdering Basiliskes:
Their softest Touch, as smart as Lyzards stings:
Their Music, frightfull as the Serpents hiss,
And boading Screech-Owles, make the Consort full.
All the foul terrors in dark seated hell --

Enough sweet Suffolk, thou torment'st thy self,
And these dread curses like the Sun against glass,
Or like an ouer-charged Gun, recoile,
And turns the force of them upon thy self.

You bad me ban, and will you bid me leave?
Now by the ground that I am banished from,
Well could I curse away a Winters night,
Though standing naked on a Mountain top,
Where biting cold would never let grass grow,
And think it but a minute spent in sport.

Oh, let me entreat thee cease, give me thy hand,
That I may dew it with my mournful tea^es:
Nor let the rain of heaven wet this place,
To wash away my woeful Monuments.
Oh, could this kiss be printed in thy hand,
That thou might think upon these by the Seal,
Through whom a thousand sighs are breathed for thee.
So get thee gone, that I may know my grief,
It Is but surmiz'd, whiles thou art standing by,
As one that surfets, thinking on a want:
I will repeal thee, or be well assured,
Adventure to be banished my self:
And banished I am, if but from thee.
Go, speak not to me; even now be gone.
Oh go not yet. Even thus, two Friends condemned,
Embrace, and kiss, and take ten thousand leaves,
Loather a hundred times to part then dye;
Yet now farewell, and farewell Life with thee.

Thus is poor Suffolk ten times banished,
Once by the King, and three times thrice by thee.
It Is not the Land I care for, were thou thence,
A Wilderness is populous enough,
So Suffolk had thy heavenly company:
For where thou art, there is the World it self,
With every several pleasure in the World:
And where thou art not, Desolation.
I can no more: Live thou to joy thy life;
My self no joy in naught, but that thou live.

Whether goes Vaux so fast? What news I prithee?


To signify unto his Majesty,
That Cardinal Beauford is at point of death:
For suddenly a grievous sickness took him,
That makes him gasp, and stare, and catch the air,
Blaspheming God, and cursing men on earth.
Sometime he talks, as if Duke Humfries Ghost
Were by his side: Sometime, he calls the King,
And whispers to his pillow, as to him,
The secrets of his ouer-charged soul,
And I am sent to tell his Majesty,
That even now he cries alowd for him.

Go tell this heavy Message to the King.
Aye me! What is this World? What news are these?
But wherefore grieve I at an hours poor loss,
Omitting Suffolkes exile, my souls Treasure?
Why only Suffolk mourn I not for thee?
And with the Southern clouds, contend in tears?
Theirs for the earths increase, mine for my sorrows.
Now get thee hence, the King thou know is coming,
If thou be found by me, thou art but dead.

If I depart from thee, I cannot live,
And in thy sight to dye, what were it else,
But like a pleasant slumber in thy lap?
Here could I breath my soul into the air,
As mild and gentle as the Cradle-babe,
Dying with mothers dugge between it is lips.
Where from thy sight, I should be raging mad,
And cry out for thee to close up mine eyes:
To have thee with thy lips to stop my mouth:
So should thou either turn my flying soul,
Or I should breathe it so into thy body,
And then it lived in sweet Elysium.
To dye by thee, were but to dye in jest,
From thee to dye, were torture more then death:
Oh let me stay, befall what may befall.

Away: Though parting be a fretfull corosiue,
Ir is applied to a deathfull wound.
To France sweet Suffolk: Let me hear from thee:
For wheresoere thou art in this worlds Globe,
I Will have an Iris that shall find thee out.

I go.


And take my heart with thee.


A Jewel locked into the wofulst Caske,
That ever did contain a thing of worth,
Even as a splitted Bark, so sunder we:
This way fall I to death.

This way for me.


How fare's my Lord? Speak Beauford to thy Sovereign.


If thou be death, I Will give thee Englands Treasure,
Enough to purchase such another Island,
So thou will let me live, and feel no pain.

Ah, what a sign it is of evil life,
Where death's approach is seen so terrible.

Beauford, it is thy Sovereign speaks to thee.


Bring me unto my Trial when you will.
Died he not in his bed? Where should he dye?
Can I make men live where they will or no?
Oh torture me no more, I will confess.
Alive again? Then show me where he is,
I Will give a thousand pound to look upon him.
He has no eyes, the dust has blinded them.
Comb down his hair; look, look, it stands upright,
Like Lime-twigs set to catch my winged soul:
Give me some drink, and bid the Apothecarie
Bring the strong poison that I bought of him.

Oh thou eternal mouer of the heavens,
Look with a gentle eye upon this Wretch,
Oh beat away the busy meddling Fiend,
That lays strong siege unto this wretches soul,
And from his bosom purge this black despair.

See how the pangs of death do make him grin.


Disturb him not, let him pass peaceably.


Peace to his soul, if Gods good pleasure be.
Lord Card'nall, if thou think on heavens bliss,
Hold up thy hand, make signal of thy hope.
He dies and makes no sign: Oh God forgive him.

So bad a death, argues a monstrous life.


Forbear to judge, for we are sinners all.
Close up his eyes, and draw the Curtain close,
And let us all to Meditation.

The gaudy blabbing and remorsefull day,
Is crept into the bosom of the Sea:
And now loud houling Wolves arouse the Iades
That dragge the Tragic melancholy night:
Who with their drowsy, slow, and flagging wings
Cleape dead-mens graves, and from their misty Jaws,
Breath foul contagious darkness in the air:
Therefore bring forth the Soldiers of our prize,
For whilst our Pinnace Anchors in the Downs,
Here shall they make their ransom on the sand,
Or with their blood stain this discolored shore.
Master, this Prisoner freely give I thee,
And thou that art his Mate, make boot of this:
The other Walter Whitmore is thy share.

What is my ransom Master, let me know.


A thousand Crowns, or else lay down your head


And so much shall you give, or often goes yours.


What think you much to pay 2000. Crowns,
And bear the name and port of Gentlemen?
Cut both the Villains throats, for die you shall:
The lives of those which we have lost in fight,
Be counter-poys'd with such a petty sum.

I Will give it sir, and therefore spare my life.


And so will I, and write home for it straight.


I lost mine eye in laying the prize aboard,
And therefore to revenge it, shall thou dye,
And so should these, if I might have my will.

Be not so rash, take ransom, let him live.


Look on my George, I am a Gentleman,
Rate me at what thou will, thou shall be paid.

And so am I: my name is Walter Whitmore.
How now? why starts thou? What does death affright?

Thy name affrights me, in whose sound is death:
A cunning man did calculate my birth,
And told me that by Water I should dye:
Yet let not this make thee be bloody-minded,
Thy name is Gualtier, being rightly sounded.

Gualtier or Walter, which it is I care not,
Never yet did base dishonor blurre our name,
But with our sword we wiped away the blot.
Therefore, when Merchant-like I sell revenge,
Broke be my sword, my Arms torn and defaced,
And I proclaimed a Coward through the world.

Stay Whitmore, for thy Prisoner is a Prince,
The Duke of Suffolk, William de la Pole.

The Duke of Suffolk, muffled up in rags?


I, but these rags are no part of the Duke.


But Jove was never slain as thou shall be,
Obscure and lousy Swain, King Henry's blood.

The honorable blood of Lancaster
Must not be shed by such a iaded Groom:
Have thou not kissed thy hand, and held my stirrup?
Bare-headed plodded by my foot-cloth Mule,
And thought thee happy when I shook my head.
How often have thou waited at my cup,
Fed from my Trencher, kneeled down at the board,
When I have feasted with Queen Margaret?
Remember it, and let it make thee Crest-falne,
I, and alay this thy abortiue Pride:
How in our voyding Lobby have thou stood,
And duly waited for my coming forth?
This hand of mine has writ in thy behalf,
And therefore shall it charm thy riotous tongue.

Speak Captain, shall I stab the forlorn Swain.


First let my words stab him, as he has me.


Base slave, thy words are blunt, and so art thou.


Convey him hence, and on our long boats side,
Strike off his head.

Thou dare not for thy own.


Poole, Sir Poole? Lord,
I kennell, puddle, sink, whose filth and dirt
Troubles the silver Spring, where England drinks:
Now will I dam up this thy yawning mouth,
For swallowing the Treasure of the Realm.
Thy lips that kissed the Queen, shall sweep the ground:
And thou that smil'dst at good Duke Humfries death,
Against the senseless winds shall grin in vain,
Who in contempt shall hiss at thee again.
And wedded be thou to the Hagges of hell,
For daring to affye a mighty Lord
Unto the daughter of a worthless King,
Having neither Subject, Wealth, nor Diadem:
By devilish policy art thou grown great,
And like ambitious Sylla ouer-gorg'd,
With gobbets of thy Mother-bleeding heart.
By thee Aniou and Maine were sold to France.
The false reuolting Normans thorough thee,
Disdain to call us Lord, and Piccardie
Has slain their Governors, surpised our Forts,
And sent the ragged Soldiers wounded home.
The Princely Warwick, and the Neuils all,
Whose dreadful swords were never drawn in vain,
As hating thee, and rising up in arms:
And now the House of York thrust from the Crown,
By shameful murder of a guiltless King,
And lofty proud incroaching tyranny,
Burns with revenging fire, whose hopeful colors
Advance our halfe-fac'd Sun, striving to shine;
Under the which is writ, Inuitis nubibus.
The Commons here in Kent are up in arms,
And to conclude, Reproach and Beggerie,
Is crept into the Palace of our King,
And all by thee: away, convey him hence.

O that I were a God, to shoot forth Thunder
Upon these paltry, servile, abject Drudges:
Small things make base men proud. This Villain here,
Being Captain of a Pinnace, threatens more
Then Bargulus the strong Illyrian Pyrate.
Drones suck not Eagles blood, but rob Bee-hiues:
It is impossible that I should dye
By such a lowly Vassal as thy self.
Thy words move Rage, and not remorse in me:
I go of Message from the Queen to France:
I charge thee waft me safely cross the Channel.

Water: W. Come Suffolk, I must waft thee to thy death.


Pine gelidus timor occupat artus, it is thee I fear.


Thou shall have cause to fear before I leave thee.
What, are ye danted now? Now will ye stoop.

My gracious Lord entreat him, speak him fair.


Suffolkes Imperial tongue is stern and rough:
Used to command, untaught to plead for favor.
Far be it, we should honor such as these
With humble suite: no, rather let my head
Stoop to the block, then these knees bow to any,
Save to the God of heaven, and to my King:
And sooner dance upon a bloody pole,
Then stand vncouer'd to the Vulgar Groom.
True Nobility, is exempt from fear:
More can I bear, then you dare execute.

Hale him away, and let him talk no more:
Come Soldiers, show what cruelty ye can.

That this my death may never be forgot.
Great men often dye by vilde Bezonions.
A Roman Sworder, and Bandetto slave
Murdered sweet Tully. Bruim Bastard hand
Stabbed Julius Caesar. Savage Islanders
Pompey the Great, and Suffolk dies by Pirates.

And as for these whose ransom we have set,
It is our pleasure one of them depart:
Therefore come you with us, and let him go.

There let his head, and liuelesse body lie,
Until the Queen his Mistress bury it.

O barbarous and bloody spectacle,
His body will I bear unto the King:
If he revenge it not, yet will his Friends,
So will the Queen, that living, held him dear.

Come and get thee a sword, though made of a Lath, they have been up these two
days


They have the more need to sleep now then.


I tell thee, Jack Cade the Cloathier, means to dress the Commonwealth and
turn it, and set a new nap upon it


So he had need, for it is threadbare. Well, I say, it was never merry world in
England, since Gentlemen came up


O miserable Age: Virtue is not regarded in Handy-crafts men.


The Nobility think scorn to go in Leather Aprons.


Nay more, the Kings Council are no good Workmen.


True: and yet it is said, Labor in thy Vocation: which is as much to say, as
let the Magistrates be laboring men, and therefore should we be Magistrates


Thou have hit it: for there is no better sign of a brave mind, then a hard
hand


I see them, I see them: There Is Bests Son, the Tanner of Wingham.


He shall have the skins of our enemies, to make Dogs Leather of.


And Dicke the Butcher.


Then is sin struck down like an Ox, and iniquities throat cut like a Calfe.


And Smith the Weauer.


Argo, their thread of life is spun.


Come, come, let us fall in with them.


We John Cade, so termed of our supposed Father.


Or rather of stealing a Cade of Herrings.


For our enemies shall fail before us, inspired with the spirit of putting
down Kings and Princes. Command silence


Silence.


My Father was a Mortimer.


He was an honest man, and a good Bricklayer.


My mother a Plantagenet.


I knew her well, she was a Midwife.


My wife descended of the Lacies.


She was indeed a Pedlers daughter, and sold many Laces.


But now of late, not able to travel with her furred Pack, she washes buckes
here at home


Therefore am I of an honorable house.


I by my faith, the field is honorable, and there was he borne, under a hedge:
for his Father had never a house but the Cage


Valiant I am.


A must needs, for beggary is valiant.


I am able to endure much.


No question of that: for I have seen him whipped three Market days together.


I fear neither sword, nor fire.


He need not fear the sword, for his Coat is of proof.


But me thinks he should stand in fear of fire, being burnt in th hand for
stealing of Sheep


Be brave then, for your Captain is Brave, and Vows Reformation. There shall
be in England, seven half penny Loaves sold for a penny: the three hoop'd pot,
shall have ten hoopes, and I will make it Felony to drink small Beer. All the
Realm shall be in Common, and in Cheapside shall my Palfrey go to grass: and
when I am King, as King I will be


God save your Majesty.


I thank you good people. There shall be no money, all shall eat and drink
on my score, and I will apparel them all in one Livery, that they may agree
like Brothers, and worship me their Lord


The first thing we do, let us kill all the Lawyers.


Nay, that I mean to do. Is not this a lamentable thing, that of the skin of
an innocent Lamb should be made Parchment; that Parchment being scribeld ore,
should undo a man. Some say the Be stings, but I say, it is the Bees wax: for
I did but seal once to a thing, and I was never mine own man since. How now?
Who Is there


The Clearke of Chartam: he can write and read, and cast account.


O monstrous.


We took him setting of boys Copies.


Here Is a Villain.


Has a Book in his pocket with red Letters in it


Nay then he is a Coniurer.


Nay, he can make Obligations, and write Court hand.


I am sorry for it: The man is a proper man of mine Honor: unless I find him
guilty, he shall not die. Come hither sirrah, I must examine thee: What is thy
name


Emanuell.


They use to writ it on the top of Letters: 'Twill go hard with you.


Let me alone: Do thou use to write thy name? Or have thou a mark to thy
self, like a honest plain dealing man


Sir I thank God, I have bin so well brought up, that I can write my name.


He has confessed: away with him: he is a Villain and a Traitor.


Away with him I say: Hang him with his Pen and Inke-horne about his neck.


Where Is our General?


Here I am thou particular fellow.


Fly, fly, fly, Sir Humfrey Stafford and his brother are hard by, with the
Kings Forces


Stand villain, stand, or I Will fell thee down: he shall be encountered with a
man as good as himself. He is but a Knight, is a


No.


To equal him I will make my self a knight presently; Rise up Sir John
Mortimer. Now have at him


Rebellious Hinds, the filth and scum of Kent,
Marked for the Gallows: Lay your Weapons down,
Home to your Cottages: forsake this Groom.
The King is merciful, if you revolt.

But angry, wrathful, and inclined to blood,
If you go forward: therefore yield, or dye.

As for these silken-coated slaves I pass not,
It is to you good people, that I speak,
Over whom (in time to come) I hope to reign:
For I am rightful heir unto the Crown.

Villain, thy Father was a Playsterer,
And thou thy self a Sheareman, art thou not?

And Adam was a Gardener.


And what of that?


Marry, this Edmund Mortimer Earl of March, married the Duke of Clarence
daughter, did he not


I sir.


By her he had two children at one birth.


That Is false.


I, there is the question; But I say, it is true:
The elder of them being put to nurse,
Was by a begger-woman stolen away,
And ignorant of his birth and parentage,
Became a Bricklayer, when he came to age.
His son am I, deny it if you can.

Nay, it is too true, therefore he shall be King.


Sir, he made a Chimney in my Fathers house, and the brickes are alive at this
day to testify it: therefore deny it not


And will you credit this base Drudges Words, that speaks he knows not what.


I marry will we: therefore get ye gone.


Jack Cade, the D. of York has taught you this.


He lies, for I invented it my self. Go too Sirrah, tell the King from me,
that for his Fathers sake Henry the fifth, (in whose time, boys went to
Span-counter for French Crowns) I am content he shall reign, but I Will be
Protector over him


And furthermore, we will have the Lord Says head, for selling the Dukedom of
Maine


And good reason: for thereby is England main'd And feign to go with a staff,
but that my puissance holds it up. Fellow-Kings, I tell you, that that Lord Say
has gelded the Commonwealth, and made it an Eunuch: and more then that, he can
speak French, and therefore he is a Traitor


O gross and miserable ignorance.


Nay answer if you can: The Frenchmen are our enemies: go too then, I ask but
this: Can he that speaks with the tongue of an enemy, be a good Counselor, or
no


No, no, and therefore we will have his head.


Well, seeing gentle words will not prevail,
Assail them with the Army of the King.

Herald away, and throughout every Town,
Proclaim them Traitors that are up with Cade,
That those which fly before the battle ends,
May even in their Wives and Childrens sight,
Be hanged up for example at their doors:
And you that be the Kings Friends follow me.

And you that love the Commons, follow me:
Now show your selves men, it is for Liberty.
We will not leave one Lord, one Gentleman:
Spare none, but such as go in clouted shooen,
For they are thrifty honest men, and such
As would (but that they dare not) take our parts.

They are all in order, and march toward us.


But then are we in order, when we are most out of order. Come, march forward.


Where Is Dicke, the Butcher of Ashford?


Here sir.


They fell before thee like Sheep and Oxen, and thou behaued'st thy self, as
if thou had been in thine own Slaughterhouse: Therefore thus will I reward
thee, the Lent shall be as long again as it is, and thou shall have a License
to kill for a hundred lacking one


I desire no more.


And to speak truth, thou deseru'st no less. This Monument of the victory
will I bear, and the bodies shall be dragged at my horse heels, till I do
come to London, where we will have the Majors sword born before us


If we mean to thrive, and do good, break open the Gaoles, and let out the
Prisoners


Fear not that I warrant thee. Come, let us march toward London.


Often have I heard that grief softens the mind,
And makes it fearful and degenerate,
Think therefore on revenge, and cease to weep.
But who can cease to weep, and look on this.
Here may his head lie on my throbbing breast:
But where is the body that I should embrace?

What answer makes your Grace to the Rebels Supplication?


I Will send some holy Bishop to entreat:
For God forbid, so many simple souls
Should perish by the Sword. And I my self,
Rather then bloody War shall cut them short,
Will parley with Jack Cade their General.
But stay, I Will read it over once again.

Ah barbarous villains: Has this lovely face,
Ruled like a wandering Plannet over me,
And could it not enforce them to relent,
That were unworthy to behold the same.

Lord Say, Jack Cade has sworn to huae thy head.


I, but I hope your Highness shall have his.


How now Madam?
Still lamenting and mourning for Suffolkes death?
I fear me (Love) if that I had been dead,
Thou would not have mourned so much for me.

No my Love, I should not mourn, but dye for thee.


How now? What news? Why come thou in such haste?


The Rebels are in Southwarke: Fly my Lord:
Jack Cade proclaims himself Lord Mortimer,
Descended from the Duke of Clarence house,
And calls your Grace Usurper, openly,
And vows to Crown himself in Westminster.
His Army is a ragged multitude
Of Hindes and Pezants, rude and merciless:
Sir Humfrey Stafford, and his Brothers death,
Has given them heart and courage to proceed:
All Scholars, Lawyers, Courtiers, Gentlemen,
They call false Catterpillers, and intend their death.

Oh graceless men: they know not what they do.


My gracious Lord, retire to Killingworth,
Until a power be raised to put them down.

Ah were the Duke of Suffolk now alive,
These Kentish Rebels would be soon appeased.

Lord Say, the Traitors hates thee,
Therefore away with us to Killingworth.

So might your Graces person be in danger:
The sight of me is odious in their eyes:
And therefore in this City will I stay,
And live alone as secret as I may.

Jack Cade has gotten London Bridge.
The Citizens fly and forsake their houses:
The Rascal people, thirsting after prey,
Join with the Traitor, and they jointly swear
To spoil the City, and your Royal Court.

Then linger not my Lord, away, take horse.


Come Margaret, God our hope will succor us.


My hope is gone, now Suffolk is deceast.


Farewell my Lord, trust not the Kentish Rebels


Trust no body for fear you betrayed.


The trust I have, is in mine innocence,
And therefore am I bold and resolute.

How now? Is Jack Cade slain?


No my Lord, nor likely to be slain:
For they have won the Bridge,
Killing all those that withstand them:
The L. Mayor craves aid of your Honor from the Tower
To defend the City from the Rebels.

Such aid as I can spare you shall command,
But I am troubled here with them my self,
The Rebels have assayed to win the Tower.
But get you to Smithfield, and gather head,
And thither I will send you Matthew Goffe.
Fight for your King, your Country, and your Lives,
And so farewell, for I must hence again.

Now is Mortimer Lord of this City,
And here sitting upon London Stone,
I charge and command, that of the Cities cost
The pissing Conduit run nothing but Clarret Wine
This first year of our reign.
And now henceforward it shall be Treason for any,
That calls me other then Lord Mortimer.

Jack Cade, Jack Cade.


Knock him down there.


If this Fellow be wise, he will never call ye Jack Cade more, I think he has
a very fair warning


My Lord, there is an Army gathered together in Smithfield.


Come, then let us go fight with them:
But first, go and set London Bridge on fire,
And if you can, burn down the Tower too.
Come, let us away.

So sirs: now go some and pull down the Sauoy:
Others to' th Innes of Court, down with them all.

I have a suite unto your Lordship.


Be it a Lordshippe, thou shall have it for that word.


Only that the Laws of England may come out of your mouth.


Mass 'twill be sore Law then, for he was thrust in the mouth with a Spear,
and it is not whole yet


Nay John, it will be stinking Law, for his breath stinkes with eating toasted
cheese


I have thought upon it, it shall be so. Away, burn all the Records of the
Realm, my mouth shall be the Parliament of England


Then we are like to have biting Statutes
Unless his teeth be pulled out.

And hence-forward all things shall be in Common.


My Lord, a prize, a prize, heeres the Lord Say, which sold the Towns in
France. He that made us pay one and twenty Fifteenes, and one shilling to the
pound, the last Subsidy


Well, he shall be beheaded for it ten times: Ah thou Say, thou Surge, nay
thou Buckram Lord, now art thou within point-blanke of our Jurisdiction Regal.
What can thou answer to my Majesty, for giving up of Normandy unto Mounsieur
Basimecu, the Dolphine of France? Be it known unto thee by these presence,
even the presence of Lord Mortimer, that I am the Beesome that must sweep the
Court clean of such filth as thou art: Thou have most traitorously corrupted
the youth of the Realm, in erecting a Grammar School: and whereas before, our
Forefathers had no other Books but the Score and the Tally, thou have caused
printing to be used, and contrary to the King, his Crown, and Dignity, thou
have built a Paper-Mill. It will be proved to thy Face, that thou have men
about thee, that usually talk of a Nowne and a Verb, and such abominable
words, as no Christian ear can endure to hear. Thou have appointed Justices
of Peace, to call poor men before them, about matters they were not able to
answer. Moreover, thou have put them in prison, and because they could not
read, thou have hanged them, when (indeed) only for that cause they have
been most worthy to live. Thou do ride in a foot-cloth, do thou not


What of that?


Marry, thou ought not to let thy horse wear a Cloak, when honester men
then thou go in their Hose and Doublets


And work in their shirt to, as my self for example, that am a butcher.


You men of Kent.


What say you of Kent.


Nothing but this: It Is bona terra, mala gens.


Away with him, away with him, he speaks Latin.


Hear me but speak, and bear me wher'e you will:
Kent, in the Commentaries Caesar writ,
Is termed the ciuel'st place of all this Isle:
Sweet is the Country, because full of Riches,
The People Liberal, Valiant, Active, Wealthy,
Which makes me hope you are not void of pity.
I sold not Maine, I lost not Normandy,
Yet to recover them would loose my life:
Justice with favor have I always done,
Prayres and Tears have moved me, Gifts could never.
When have I ought exacted at your hands?
Kent to maintain, the King, the Realm and you,
Large gifts have I bestowed on learned Clearkes,
Because my Book preferred me to the King.
And seeing Ignorance is the curse of God,
Knowledge the Wing wherewith we fly to heaven.
Unless you be possessed with devilish spirits,
You cannot but forbear to murder me:
This Tongue has parlied unto Foreign Kings
For your behoof.

Tut, when struck'st thou one blow in the field?


Great men have reaching hands: often have I struck
Those that I never saw, and struck them dead.

O monstrous Coward! What, to come behind Folks?


These cheeks are pale for watching for your good


Give him a box of the ear, and that will make 'em red again.


Long sitting to determine poor men's causes,
Has made me full of sickness and diseases.

Ye shall have a hempen Candle then, and the help of hatchet.


Why do thou quiver man?


The Palsy, and not fear prouokes me.


Nay, he noddes at us, as who should say, I Will be even with you. I Will see if his
head will stand steddier on a pole, or no: Take him away, and behead him


Tell me: wherein have I offended most?
Have I affected wealth, or honor? Speak.
Are my Chests filled up with extorted Gold?
Is my Apparel sumptuous to behold?
Whom have I injured, that ye seek my death?
These hands are free from guiltless bloodshedding,
This breast from harboring foul deceitful thoughts.
O let me live.

I feel remorse in my self with his words: but I Will bridle it: he shall dye,
and it be but for pleading so well for his life. Away with him, he has a
Familiar under his Tongue, he speaks not a Gods name. Go, take him away I
say, and strike off his head presently, and then break into his Son in Laws
house, Sir James Cromer, and strike off his head, and bring them both upon two
poles hither


It shall be done.


Ah Countrymen: If when you make your prair's,
God should be so obdurate as your selves:
How would it fare with your departed souls,
And therefore yet relent, and save my life.

Away with him, and do as I command ye: the proudest Peer in the Realm, shall
not wear a head on his shoulders, unless he pay me tribute: there shall not a
maid be married, but she shall pay to me her Mayden-head ere they have it: Men
shall hold of me in Capite. And we charge and command, that their wives be as
free as heart can wish, or tongue can tell


My Lord,
When shall we go to Cheapside, and take up commodities upon our bills?

Marry presently.


O brave.


But is not this brauer:
Let them kiss one another: For they loved well
When they were alive. Now part them again,
Least they consult about the giving up
Of some more Towns in France. Soldiers,
Defer the spoil of the City until night:
For with these borne before us, in steed of Maces,
Will we ride through the streets, and at every Corner
Have them kiss. Away.

Up Fish-streete, down Saint Magnes corner, kill and knock down, throw them
into Thames

What noise is this I hear?
Dare any be so bold to sound Retreat or Parley
When I command them kill?

I here they be, that dare and will disturb thee:
Know Cade, we come Ambassadors from the King
Unto the Commons, whom thou have misled,
And here pronounce free pardon to them all,
That will forsake thee, and go home in peace.

What say ye Countrymen, will ye relent
And yield to mercy, whilst it is offered you,
Or let a rabble lead you to your deaths.
Who loves the King, and will embrace his pardon,
Fling up his cap, and say, God save his Majesty.
Who hates him, and honors not his Father,
Henry the fifth, that made all France to quake,
Shake he his weapon at us, and pass by.

God save the King, God save the King.


What Buckingham and Clifford are ye so brave? And you base Pezants, do ye
believe him, will you needs be hanged with your Pardons about your necks? Has
my sword therefore broke through London gates, that you should leave me at the
White-heart in Southwarke. I thought ye would never have given out these Arms
til you had recovered your ancient Freedom. But you are all Recreants and
Dastards, and delight to live in slavery to the Nobility. Let them break your
backs with burdens, take your houses over your heads, ravish your Wives and
Daughters before your faces. For me, I will make shift for one, and so Gods
Curse light upon you all


We Will follow Cade,
We Will follow Cade.

Is Cade the son of Henry the fifth,
That thus you do exclaim you will go with him.
Will he conduct you through the heart of France,
And make the meanest of you Earls and Dukes?
Alas, he has no home, no place to fly too:
Nor knows he how to live, but by the spoil,
Unless by robbing of your Friends, and us.
Were not a shame, that whilst you live at jar,
The fearful French, whom you late vanquished
Should make a start ore-seas, and vanquish you?
Me thinks already in this civil broyle,
I see them Lording it in London streets,
Crying Villiago unto all they meet.
Better ten thousand base-borne Cades miscarry,
Then you should stoop unto a Frenchmans mercy.
To France, to France, and get what you have lost:
Spare England, for it is your Native Coast:
Henry has money, you are strong and manly:
God on our side, doubt not of Victory.

A Clifford, a Clifford.
We Will follow the King, and Clifford.

Was ever Feather so lightly blown too and fro, as this multitude? The name of
Henry the fifth, hales them to an hundred mischiefs, and makes them leave me
desolate. I see them lay their heads together to surprise me. My sword make
way for me, for here is no staying: in despite of the devils and hell, have
through the very midst of you, and heavens and honor be witness, that no
want of resolution in me, but only my Followers base and ignominious
treasons, makes me betake me to my he^les


What, is he fled? Go some and follow him,
And he that brings his head unto the King,
Shall have a thousand Crowns for his reward.
Follow me soldiers, we will devise a mean,
To reconcile you all unto the King.

Was ever King that joyed an earthly Throne,
And could command no more content then I?
No sooner was I crept out of my Cradle,
But I was made a King, at nine months old.
Was never Subject longed to be a King,
As I do long and wish to be a Subject.

Health and glad tidings to your Majesty.


Why Buckingham, is the Traitor Cade surprised?
Or is he but retired to make him strong?

He is fled my Lord, and all his powers do yield,
And humbly thus with halters on their necks,
Expect your Highness doom of life, or death.

Then heaven set open thy everlasting gates,
To entertain my vows of thanks and praise.
Soldiers, this day have you redeemed your lives,
And showed how well you love your Prince and Country:
Continue still in this so good a mind,
And Henry though he be unfortunate,
Assure your selves will never be unkind:
And so with thanks, and pardon to you all,
I do dismiss you to your several Countries.

God save the King, God save the King.


Please it your Grace to be advertised,
The Duke of York is newly come from Ireland,
And with a puissant and a mighty power
Of Gallow-glasses and stout Kernes,
Is marching hitherward in proud array,
And still proclaims as he comes along,
His Arms are only to remove from thee
The Duke of Somerset, whom he terms a Traitor.

Thus stands my state, 'twixt Cade and York distressed,
Like to a Ship, that having escaped a Tempest,
Is straight way calm, and boorded with a Pyrate.
But now is Cade driven back, his men dispierc'd,
And now is York in Arms, to second him.
I pray thee Buckingham go and meet him,
And ask him what is the reason of these Arms:
Tell him, I Will send Duke Edmund to the Tower,
And Somerset we will commit thee thither,
Until his Army be dismissed from him.

My Lord,
I Will yield my self to prison willingly,
Or unto death, to do my Country good.

In any case, be not to rough in terms,
For he is fierce, and cannot brook hard Language.

I will my Lord, and doubt not so to deal,
As all things shall redound unto your good.

Come wife, let us in, and learn to govern better,
For yet may England curse my wretched reign.

Fie on Ambitions: fie on my self, that have a sword, and yet am ready to
famish. These five days have I hid me in these Woods, and durst not peep out,
for all the Country is laid for me: but now am I so hungry, that if I might
have a Lease of my life for a thousand years, I could stay no longer.
Wherefore on a Brick wall have I climbed into this Garden, to see if I can
eat Grass, or pick a Sallet another while, which is not amiss to cool a
man's stomach this hot weather: and I think this word Sallet was borne to do me
good: for many a time but for a Sallet, my braine-pan had been cleft with a
brown Bill; and many a time when I have been dry, and bravely marching, it
has served me insteede of a quart pot to drink in: and now the word Sallet
must serve me to feed on


Lord, who would live turmoyled in the Court,
And may enjoy such quiet walks as these?
This small inheritance my Father left me,
Contenteth me, and worth a Monarchy.
I seek not to wax great by others warning,
Or gather wealth I care not with what envy:
Suffices, that I have maintains my state,
And sends the poor well pleased from my gate.

Here Is the Lord of the soil come to seize me for a stray, for entering his
Fee-simple without leave. A Villain, thou will betray me, and get a 1000.
Crowns of the King by carrying my head to him, but I Will make thee eat Iron
like an Ostridge, and swallow my Sword like a great pin ere thou and I part


Why rude Companion, whatsoere thou be,
I know thee not, why then should I betray thee?
Is It not enough to break into my Garden,
And like a Thief to come to rob my grounds:
Climbing my walls inspight of me the Owner,
But thou will brave me with these saucy terms?

Brave thee? I by the best blood that ever was broached, and beard thee to.
Look on me well, I have eat no meat these five days, yet come thou and thy
five men, and if I do not leave you all as dead as a door nail, I pray God I
may never eat grass more


Nay, it shall nere be said, while England stands,
That Alexander Iden an Esquire of Kent,
Took odds to combat a poor famisht man.
Oppose thy steadfast gazing eyes to mine,
See if thou can outface me with thy looks:
Set limb to limb, and thou art far the lesser:
Thy hand is but a finger to my fist,
Thy leg a stick compared with this Truncheon,
My foot shall fight with all the strength thou have,
And if mine arm be heaued in the Air,
Thy grave is dug already in the earth:
As for words, whose greatness answer's words,
Let this my sword report what speech forbeares.

By my Valor: the most complete Champion that ever I heard. Steel, if thou
turn the edge, or cut not out the burly bon'd Clown in chines of Beef, ere
thou sleep in thy Sheath, I beseech Jove on my knees thou may be turned to
Hobnailes

O I am slain, Famine and no other has slain me, let ten thousand diuelles
come against me, and give me but the ten meals I have lost, and I Would defy
them all. Wither Garden, and be henceforth a burying place to all that do dwell
in this house, because the unconquered soul of Cade is fled


Is It Cade that I have slain, that monstrous traitor?
Sword, I will hallow thee for this thy deed,
And hang thee over my Tomb, when I am dead.
Never shall this blood be wiped from thy point,
But thou shall wear it as a Heralds coat,
To emblaze the Honor that thy Master got.

Iden farewell, and be proud of thy victory: Tell Kent from me, she has lost
her best man, and exhort all the World to be Cowards: For I that never feared
any, am vanquished by Famine, not by Valor


How much thou wrong'st me, heaven be my judge;
Die damned Wretch, the curse of her that bare thee:
And as I thrust thy body in with my sword,
So wish I, I might thrust thy soul to hell.
Hence will I dragge thee headlong by the heels
Unto a dunghill, which shall be thy grave,
And there cut off thy most ungracious head,
Which I will bear in triumph to the King,
Leaving thy trunk for Crows to feed upon.

From Ireland thus comes York to claim his right,
And pluck the Crown from feeble Henry's head.
Ring Belles alowd, burn Bonfires clear and bright
To entertain great Englands lawful King.
Ah Sancta Maiestas! who would not buy thee dear?
Let them obey, that knows not how to Rule.
This hand was made to handle naught but Gold.
I cannot give due action to my words,
Except a Sword or Scepter balance it.
A Scepter shall it have, have I a soul,
On which I Will toss the Fleure-de-Luce of France.
Whom have we here? Buckingham to disturb me?
The king has sent him sure: I must dissemble.

York, if thou meanest well, I greet thee well.


Humfrey of Buckingham, I accept thy greeting.
Art thou a Messenger, or come of pleasure.

A Messenger from Henry, our dread Liege,
To know the reason of these Arms in peace.
Or why, thou being a Subject, as I am,
Against thy Oath, and true Allegiance sworn,
Should raise so great a power without his leave?
Or dare to bring thy Force so near the Court?

Scarce can I speak, my Choler is so great.
Oh I could hew up Rocks, and fight with Flint,
I am so angry at these abject terms.
And now like Ajax Telamonius,
On Sheep or Oxen could I spend my fury.
I am far better borne then is the king:
More like a King, more Kingly in my thoughts.
But I must make fair weather yet a while,
Till Henry be more weak, and I more strong.
Buckingham, I prithee pardon me,
That I have given no answer all this while:
My mind was troubled with deep Melancholy.
The cause why I have brought this Army hither,
Is to remove proud Somerset from the King,
Seditious to his Grace, and to the State.

That is too much presumption on thy part:
But if thy Arms be to no other end,
The King has yielded unto thy demand:
The Duke of Somerset is in the Tower.

Upon thine Honor is he Prisoner?


Upon mine Honor he is Prisoner.


Then Buckingham I do dismiss my Powers.
Soldiers, I thank you all: disperse your selves:
Meet me to morrow in S. Georges Field,
You shall have pay, and every thing you wish.
And let my Sovereign, virtuous Henry,
Command my eldest son, nay all my sons,
As pledges of my Fealty and Love,
I Will send them all as willing as I live:
Lands, Goods, Horse, Armor, any thing I have
Is his to use, so Somerset may die.

York, I commend this kind submission,
We twain will go into his Highness Tent.

Buckingham, does York intend no harm to us
That thus he marches with thee arm in arm?

In all submission and humility,
York does present himself unto your Highness.

Then what intends these Forces thou do bring?


To heave the Traitor Somerset from hence,
And fight against that monstrous Rebel Cade,
Who since I heard to be discomfited.

If one so rude, and of so mean condition
May pass into the presence of a King:
Lo, I present your Grace a Traitors head,
The head of Cade, whom I in combat slew.

The head of Cade? Great God, how just art thou?
Oh let me view his Visage being dead,
That living wrought me such exceeding trouble.
Tell me my Friend, art thou the man that slew him?

I was, an't like your Majesty.


How art thou called? And what is thy degree?


Alexander Iden, that is my name,
A poor Esquire of Kent, that loves his King.

So please it you my Lord, 'twere not amiss
He were created Knight for his good service.

Iden, kneel down, rise up a Knight:
We give thee for reward a thousand Marks,
And will, that thou henceforth attend on us.

May Iden live to merit such a bounty,
And never live but true unto his Liege.

See Buckingham, Somerset comes with the Queen,
Go bid her hide him quickly from the Duke.

For thousand Yorkes he shall not hide his head,
But boldly stand, and front him to his face.

How now? is Somerset at liberty?
Then York unloose thy long imprisoned thoughts,
And let thy tongue be equal with thy heart.
Shall I endure the sight of Somerset?
False King, why have thou broken faith with me,
Knowing how hardly I can brook abuse?
King did I call thee? No: thou art not King:
Not fit to govern and rule multitudes,
Which dare not, no nor can not rule a Traitor.
That Head of thine does not become a Crown:
Thy Hand is made to graspe a Palmers staff,
And not to grace an awefull Princely Scepter.
That Gold, must round engirt these brows of mine,
Whose Smile and Frown, like to Achilles Spear
Is able with the change, to kill and cure.
Here is a hand to hold a Scepter up,
And with the same to act controlling Laws:
Give place: by heaven thou shall rule no more
Over him, whom heaven created for thy Ruler.

O monstrous Traitor! I arrest thee York
Of Capital Treason against the King and Crown:
Obey audacious Traitor, kneel for Grace.

Wold'st have me kneel? First let me ask of thee,
If they can brook I bow a knee to man:
Sirrah, call in my son to be my bale:
I know ere they will have me go to Ward,
They Will pawn their swords of my infranchisement.

Call hither Clifford, bid him come amain,
To say, if that the Bastard boys of York
Shall be the Surety for their Traitor Father.

O blood-bespotted Neopolitan,
Outcast of Naples, Englands bloody Scourge,
The sons of York, thy betters in their birth,
Shall be their Fathers bail, and bane to those
That for my Surety will refuse the Boys.
See where they come, I Will warrant they will make it good.

And here comes Clifford to deny their bail.


Health, and all happiness to my Lord the King.


I thank thee Clifford: Say, what news with thee?
Nay, do not fright us with an angry look:
We are thy Sovereign Clifford, kneel again;
For thy mistaking so, We pardon thee.

This is my King York, I do not mistake,
But thou mistakes me much to think I do,
To Bedlem with him, is the man grown mad.

I Clifford, a Bedlem and ambitious humor
Makes him oppose himself against his King.

He is a Traitor, let him to the Tower,
And chop away that factious pate of his.

He is atrested, but will not obey:
His sons (he says) shall give their words for him.

Will you not Sons?


I Noble Father, if our words will serve.


And if words will not, then our Weapons shall.


Why what a brood of Traitors have we here?


Look in a Glass, and call thy Image so.
I am thy King, and thou a false-heart Traitor:
Call hither to the stake my two brave Bears,
That with the very shaking of their Chains,
They may astonish these fell-lurking Curres,
Bid Salsbury and Warwick come to me.

Are these thy Bears? We Will bate thy Bears to death,
And manacle the Berard in their Chains,
If thou dare bring them to the bayting place.

Often have I seen a hot ore-weening Curre,
Run back and bite, because he was withheld,
Who being suffered with the Bears fell paw,
Has clapped his tail, between his legs and cride,
And such a piece of service will you do,
If you oppose your selves to match Lord Warwick.

Hence heap of wrath, foul indigested lump,
As crooked in thy manners, as thy shape.

Nay we shall heat you thoroughly anon.


Take heed leaft by your heat you burn your selves:


Why Warwick, has thy knee forgot to bow?
Old Salsbury, shame to thy silver hair,
Thou mad misleader of thy brain-sicke son,
What will thou on thy deathbed play the Ruffian?
And seek for sorrow with thy Spectacles?
Oh where is Faith? Oh, where is Loyalty?
If it be banished from the frostie head,
Where shall it find a harbor in the earth?
Will thou go dig a grave to find out War,
And shame thine honorable Age with blood?
Why art thou old, and want experience?
Or wherefore do abuse it, if thou have it?
For shame in duty bend thy knee to me,
That bows unto the grave with mickle age.

My Lord, I have considered with my self
The Title of this most renowned Duke,
And in my conscience, do repute his grace
The rightful heir to Englands Royal seat.

Have thou not sworn Allegiance unto me?


I have.


Can thou dispense with heaven for such an oath?


It is great sin, to swear unto a sin:
But greater sin to keep a sinful oath:
Who can be bound by any solemn Vow
To do a murderous deed, to rob a man,
To force a spotless Virgins Chastity,
To reaue the Orphan of his Patrimony,
To wring the Widow from her custom'd right,
And have no other reason for this wrong,
But that he was bound by a solemn Oath?

A subtle Traitor needs no Sophister.


Call Buckingham, and bid him arm himself.


Call Buckingham, and all the friends thou have,
I am resolved for death and dignity.

The first I warrant thee, if dreams prove true


You were best to go to bed, and dream again,
To keep thee from the Tempest of the field.

I am resolved to bear a greater storm,
Then any thou can conjure up to day:
And that I Will write upon thy Burgonet,
Might I but know thee by thy housed Badge.

Now by my Fathers badge, old Neuils Crest,
The rampant Bear chained to the ragged staff,
This day I Will wear aloft my Burgonet,
As on a Mountain top, the Cedar shows,
That keeps his leaves inspight of any storm,
Even io affright thee with the view thereof.

And from thy Burgonet I Will rend thy Bear,
And tread it under foot with all contempt,
Despite the Bearard, that protects the Bear.

And so to Arms victorious Father,
To quell the Rebels, and their Accomplices.

Fie, Charity for shame, speak not in spite,
For you shall sup with Jesus Christ to night.

Foul stygmaticke that is more then thou can tell.


If not in heaven, you will surely sup in hell.


Clifford of Cumberland, it is Warwick calls:
And if thou do not hide thee from the Bear,
Now when the angry Trumpet sounds alarm,
And dead men's cries do fill the empty air,
Clifford I say, come forth and fight with me,
Proud Northern Lord, Clifford of Cumberland,
Warwick is hoarse with calling thee to arms.

How now my Noble Lord? What all a-foot.


The deadly handed Clifford slew my Steed:
But match to match I have encountered him,
And made a prey for Carrion Kytes and Crows
Even of the bonnie beast he loved so well.

Of one or both of us the time is come.


Hold Warwick: seek thee out some other chase
For I my self must hunt this Dear to death.

Then nobly York, it is for a Crown thou fightst:
As I intend Clifford to thrive to day,
It greeues my soul to leave theee vnassail'd.

What see thou in me York?
Why do thou pause?

With thy brave bearing should I be in love,
But that thou art so fast mine enemy.

Nor should thy prowess want praise and esteem,
But that it is shown ignobly, and in Treason.

So let it help me now against thy sword,
As I in justice, and true right express it.

My soul and body on the action both.


A dreadful lay, address thee instantly.


La fia Corrone les eumenes.


Thus War has given thee peace, for you art still,
Peace with his soul, heaven if it be thy will.

Shame and Confusion all is on the rout,
Fear frames disorder, and disorder wounds
Where it should guard. O War, thou son of hell,
Whom angry heavens do make their minister,
Throw in the frozen bosoms of our part,
Hot Coals of Vengeance. Let no Soldier fly.
He that is truly dedicate to War,
Has no self-love: nor he that loves himself,
Has not essentially, but by circumstance
The name of Valor. O let the vile world end,
And the premised Flames of the Last day,
Knit earth and heaven together.
Now let the general Trumpet blow his blast,
Particularities, and petty sounds
To cease. Was It thou ordained (dear Father)
To loose thy youth in peace, and to atcheeue
The Silver Livery of advised Age,
And in thy Reverence, and thy Chaire-dayes, thus
To die in Ruffian battle? Even at this sight,
My heart is turned to stone: and while it is mine,
It shall be stony. York, not our old men spares:
No more will I their Babes, Tears Virginal,
Shall be to me, even as the Dew to Fire,
And Beauty, that the Tyrant often reclaimes,
Shall to my flaming wrath, be Oil and Flax:
Henceforth, I will not have to do with pity.
Meet I an infant of the house of York,
Into as many gobbits will I cut it
As wild Medea young Absirtis did.
In cruelty, will I seek out my Fame.
Come thou new ruin of old Cliffords house:
As did Aeneas old Anchyses bear,
So bear I thee upon my manly shoulders:
But then, Aeneas bare a living load;
Nothing so heavy as these woes of mine.

So lie thou there:
For underneath an Alehouse paltry sign,
The Castle in S. Albons, Somerset
Has made the Wizard famous in his death:
Sword, hold thy temper; Heart, be wrathful still:
Priests pray for enemies, but Princes kill.

Away my Lord, you are slow, for shame away.


Can we outrun the Heavens? Good Margaret stay.


What are you made of? You Will nor fight nor fly:
Now is it manhood, wisdom, and defense,
To give the enemy way, and to secure us
By what we can, which can no more but fly.
If you be taken, we then should see the bottom
Of all our Fortunes: but if we happily escape,
(As well we may, if not through your neglect)
We shall to London get, where you are loved,
And where this breach now in our Fortunes made
May readily be stopped.

But that my hearts on future mischief set,
I would speak blasphemy ere bid you fly:
But fly you must: Incurable discomfite
Reigns in the hearts of all our present parts.
Away for your relief, and we will live
To see their day, and them our Fortune give.
Away my Lord, away.

Of Salsbury, who can report of him,
That Winter Lion, who in rage forgets
Aged contusions, and all brush of Time:
And like a Gallant, in the brow of youth,
Repaires him with Occasion. This happy day
Is not it self, nor have we won one foot,
If Salsbury be lost.

My Noble Father:
Three times to day I help him to his horse,
Three times bestrid him: Thrice I led him off,
Persuaded him from any further act:
But still where danger was, still there I met him,
And like rich hangings in a homely house,
So was his Will, in his old feeble body,
But Noble as he is, look where he comes.

Now by my Sword, well have thou fought to day:
By 'th 'Masse so did we all. I thank you Richard.
God knows how long it is I have to live:
And it has pleased him that three times to day
You have defended me from imminent death.
Well Lords, we have not got that which we have,
It Is not enough our foes are this time fled,
Being opposites of such repayring Nature.

I know our safety is to follow them,
For (as I hear) the King is fled to London,
To call a present Court of Parliament:
Let us pursue him ere the Writs go forth.
What says Lord Warwick, shall we after them?

After them: nay before them if we can:
Now by my hand (Lords) 'twas a glorious day.
Saint Albons battle won by famous York,
Shall be eternized in all Age to come.
Sound Drum and Trumpets, and to London all,
And more such days as these, to us befall.


