SO shaken as we are, so wan with care,
Find we a time for frighted Peace to pant,
And breath shortwinded accents of new broils
To be commenced in Stronds a-farre remote:
No more the thirsty entrance of this Soil,
Shall daube her lips with her own childrens blood:
No more shall trenching War channel her fields,
Nor bruise her Flowrets with the Armed hoofes
Of hostile paces. Those opposed eyes,
Which like the Meteors of a troubled Heaven,
All of one Nature, of one Substance bred,
Did lately meet in the intestine shocke,
And furious cloze of civil Butchery,
Shall now in mutual well-beseeming ranks
March all one way, and be no more opposed
Against Acquaintance, Kindred, and Allies.
The edge of War, like an ill-sheathed knife,
No more shall cut his Master. Therefore Friends,
As far as to the Sepulcher of Christ,
Whose Soldier now under whose blessed Cross
We are impressed and engaged to fight,
Forthwith a power of English shall we levy,
Whose arms were molded in their Mothers womb,
To chase these Pagans in those holy Fields,
Over whose Acres walked those blessed feet
Which fourteen hundred years ago were nailed
For our advantage on the bitter Cross.
But this our purpose is a twelve month old,
And bootlesse it is to tell you we will go:
Therefore we meet not now. Then let me hear
Of you my gentle Cousin Westmerland,
What vesternight our Council did decree,
In forwarding this dear expedience.

My Liege: This haste was hot in question,
And many limits of the Charge set down
But yesternight: when all athwart there came
A Post from Wales, laden with heavy News;
Whose worst was, That the Noble Mortimer,
Leading the men of Herefordshire to fight
Against the irregular and wild Glendower,
Was by the rude hands of that Welshman taken,
And a thousand of his people butchered:
Upon whose dead corpse there was such misuse,
Such beastly, shameless transformation,
By those Welshwomen done, as may not be
(Without much shame) re-told or spoken of.

It seems then, that the tidings of this broile,
Brake off our business for the Holy land.

This matched with other like, my gracious Lord,
Far more uneven and unwelcome News
Came from the North, and thus it did report:
On Holy-roode day, the gallant Hotspurre there,
Young Harry Percy, and brave Archibald,
That euer-valiant and approved Scot,
At Holmeden met, where they did spend
A fad and bloody hour:
As by discharge of their Artillery,
And shape of likelihood the news was told:
For he that brought them, in the very heat
And pride of their contention, did take horse,
Uncertain of the issue any way.

Here is a dear and true industrious friend,
Sir Walter Blunt, new lighted from his Horse,
Strained with the variation of each soil,
Betwixt that Holmedon, and this Seat of ours:
And he has brought us smooth and welcomes news.
The Earl of Douglas is discomfited,
Ten thousand bold Scots, two and twenty Knights
Balk'd in their own blood did Sir Walter see
On Holmedons Plains. Of Prisoners, Hotspurre took
Mordake Earl of Fife, and eldest son
To beaten Douglas, and the Earl of Atholl,
Of Murry, Angus, and Menteith.
And is not this an honorable spoil?
A gallant prize? Ha Cousin, is it not? Infaith it is.

A Conquest for a Prince to boast of.


Yea, there thou make me sad, and make me sin,
In envy, that my Lord Northumberland
Should be the Father of so blessed a Son:
A Son, who is the Theme of Honors tongue;
Among'st a Grove, the very straightest Plant,
Who is sweet Fortunes Minion, and her Pride:
Whilst I by looking on the praise of him,
See Riot and Dishonor stain the brow
Of my young Harry. O that it could be proved,
That some Night-tripping-Faiery, had exchanged
In Cradle-clothes, our Children where they lay,
And called mine Percy, his Plantagenet:
Then would I have his Harry, and he mine:
But let him from my thoughts. What think you Coze
Of this young Percies pride? The Prisoners
Which he in this adventure has surpised,
To his own use he keeps, and sends me word
I shall have none but Mordake Earl of Fife.

This is his Uncles teaching. This is Worcester
Maleuolent to you in all Aspects:
Which makes him prune himself, and bristle up
The crest of Youth against your Dignity.

But I have sent for him to answer this:
And for this cause awhile we must neglect
Our holy purpose to Jerusalem.
Cousin, on Wednesday next, our Council we will hold
At Windsor, and so inform the Lords:
But come your self with speed to us again,
For more is to be said, and to be done,
Then out of anger can be uttered.

I will my Liege.


Now Hal, what time of day is it Lad?


Thou art so fat-witted with drinking of old Sack, and vnbuttoning thee after
Supper, and sleeping upon Benches in the afternoon, that thou have forgotten
to demand that truly, which thou would truly know. What a devil have thou
to do with the time of the day? unless hours were cups of Sack, and minutes
Capons, and clockes the tongues of Bawdes, and dialls the signs of
Leaping-houses, and the blessed Sun himself a fair hot Wench in
Flame-coloured Taffata; I see no reason, why thou should be so superfluous,
to demand the time of the day


Indeed you come near me now Hal, for we that take Purses, go by the Moon and
seven Stars, and not by Phoebus he, that wandering Knight so fair. And I
prithee sweet Wagge, when thou art King, as God save thy Grace, Majesty I
should say, for Grace thou will have none


What, none?


No, not so much as will serve to be Prologue to an Egg and Butter.


Well, how then? Come roundly, roundly.


Marry then, sweet Wagge, when thou art King, let not us that are Squires of
the Nights body, be called Thieves of the Days beauty. Let us be Dianaes
Forresters, Gentlemen of the Shade, Minions of the Moon; and let men say, we
be men of good Government, being governed as the Sea is, by our noble and chaste
mistress the Moon, under whose countenance we steal


Thou say well, and it holds well too: for the fortune of us that are the
Moons men, does ebb and flow like the Sea, being governed as the Sea is, by
the Moon: as for proof. Now a Purse of Gold most resolutely snatched on
Monday night, and most dissolutely spent on Tuesday Morning; got with swearing,
Lay by: and spent with crying, Bring in: now, in as low an ebb as the foot of
the Ladder, and by and by in as high a flow as the ridge of the Gallows


Thou say true Lad: and is not my Hostess of the Tavern a most sweet Wench?


As is the honey, my old Lad of the Castle: and is not a Buffe Ierkin a most
sweet robe of durance


How now? how now mad Wagge? What in thy quips and thy quiddities? What a
plague have I to do with a Buffe-Ierkin


Why, what a pox have I to do with my Hostess of the Tavern?


Well, thou have called her to a reckoning many a time and often.


Did I ever call for thee to pay thy part?


No, I Will give thee thy due, thou have paid al there.


Yea and elsewhere, so far as my Coin would stretch, and where it would not,
I have used my credit


Yea, and so used it, that were it here apparent, that thou art Heir
apparent. But I prithee sweet Wag, shall there be Gallows standing in England
when thou art King? and resolution thus fobb'd as it is, with the rustie curb
of old Father Anticke the Law? Do not thou when thou art a King, hang a Thief


No, thou shall.


Shall I? O rare! I Will be a brave Judge.


Thou iudgest false already. I mean, thou shall have the hanging of the
Thieves, and so become a rare Hangman


Well Hal, well: and in some sort it iumpes with my humor, as well as waiting
in the Court, I can tell you


For obtaining of suites?


Yea, for obtaining of suites, whereof the Hangman has no lean Wardrobe. I am
as Melancholy as a Gyb-Cat, or a lugg'd Beat


Or an old Lion, or a Lovers Lute.


Yea, or the Drone of a Lincolnshire Bagpipe.


What say thou to a Hare, or the Melancholy of Moore Ditch?


Thou have the most unsavory smiles, and art indeed the most comparatiue
rascallest sweet young Prince. But Hal, I prithee trouble me no more with
vanity, I would thou and I knew, where a Commodity of good names were to be
bought: an old Lord of the Council rated me the other day in the street about
you sir; but I marked him not, and yet he talked very wisely, but I regarded
him not, and yet he talked wisely, and in the street too


Thou did well: for no man regards it.


O, thou have damnable iteration, and art indeed able to corrupt a Saint. Thou
have done much harm unto me Hall, God forgive thee for it. Before I knew thee
Hal, I knew nothing: and now I am (if a man should speak truly) little better
then one of the wicked. I must give over this life, and I will give it over:
and I do not, I am a Villain. I Will be damned for never a Kings son in
Christendom


Where shall we take a purse to morrow, Jack?


Where thou will Lad, I Will make one: and I do not, call me Villain, and
bafflle me


I see a good amendment of life in thee: From Praying, to Purse-taking.


Why, Hal, it is my Vocation Hal: It Is no sin for a man to labor in his
Vocation


Now shall we know if Gads hill have set a Watch. O, if men were to be saved
by merit, what hole in Hell were hot enough for him? This is the most
omnipotent Villain, that ever cried, Stand, to a true man


Good morrow Ned.


Good morrow sweet Hal. What says Monsieur Remorse? What says Sir John Sack
and Sugar: Jack? How agrees the Devil and thee about thy Soul, that thou
soldest him on Good Friday last, for a Cup of Madera, and a cold Capons leg


Sir John stands to his word, the devil shall have his bargain, for he was
never yet a Breaker of Proverbs: He will give the devil his due


Then art thou damned for keeping thy word with the devil.


Else he had damned for cozening the devil.


But my Lads, my Lads, to morrow morning, by four a clock early at Gads hill,
there are Pilgrims going to Canterbury with rich Offerings, and Traders riding
to London with fat Purses. I have vizards for you all; you have horses for your
selves: Gads-hill lies to night in Rochester, I have bespoke Supper to morrow
in Eastcheape; we may do it as secure as sleep: if you will go, I will stuff
your Purses full of Crowns: if you will not, tarry at home and be hanged


Hear ye Yed ward, if I tarry at home and go not, I Will hang you for going.


You will chops.


Hal, will thou make one?


Who, I rob? I a Thief? Not I.


There Is neither honesty, manhood, nor good fellowship in thee, nor thou came
not of the blood-royall, if thou dare not stand for ten shillings


Well then, once in my days I Will be a mad-cap.


Why, that is well said.


Well, come what will, I Will tarry at home.


I Will be a Traitor then, when thou art King.


I care not.


Sir John, I prithee leave the Prince and me alone, I will lay him down such
reasons for this adventure, that he shall go


Well, may thou have the Spirit of persuasion; and he the ears of profiting,
that what thou speak, may move; and what he hears may be believed, that the
true Prince, may (for recreation sake) prove a false thief; for the poor
abuses of the time, want countenance. Farewell, you shall find me in Eastcheape


Farewell the latter Spring. Farewell Alhollown Summer.


Now, my good sweet Honey Lord, ride with us to morrow. I have a jest to
execute, that I cannot manage alone. Falstaff, Haruey, Rossill, and
Gads-hill, shall rob those men that we have already way-layde, your self
and I, will not be there: and when they have the booty, if you and I do not rob
them, cut this head from my shoulders


But how shall we part with them in setting forth?


Why we will set forth before or after them, and appoint them a place of
meeting, wherein it is at our pleasure to fail; and then will they adventure
upon the exploit themselves, which they shall have no sooner achieved, but
we will set upon them


I, but it is like that they will know us by our horses, by our habits, and by
every other appointment to be our selves


Tut our horses they shall not see, I Will tie them in the wood, our vizards we
will change after we leave them: and sirrah, I have Cases of Buckram for the
nonce, to immaske our noted outward garments


But I doubt they will be too hard for us.


Well, for two of them, I know them to be as true bred Cowards as ever turned
back: and for the third if he fight longer then he sees reason, I Will forswear
Arms. The virtue of this Jest will be, the incomprehensible lies that this fat
Rogue will tell us, when we meet at Supper: how thirty at least he fought
with, what Wards, what blows, what extremities he endured; and in the
reproof of this, lies the jest


Well, I Will go with thee, provide us all things necessary, and meet me to
morrow night in Eastcheape, there I Will sup. Farewell


Farewell, my Lord.


I know you all, and will awhile uphold
The vnyoak'd humor of your idleness:
Yet herein will I imitate the Sun,
Who does permit the base contagious clouds
To smother up his Beauty from the world,
That when he please again to be himself,
Being wanted, he may be more wondered at,
By breaking through the foul and ugly mists
Of vapors, that did seem to strangle him.
If all the year were playing holidaies,
To sport, would be as tedious as to work;
But when they seldom come, they wisht-for come,
And nothing pleases but rare accidents.
So when this loose behavior I throw off,
And pay the debt I never promised;
By how much better then my word I am,
By so much shall I falsify men's hopes,
And like bright Metal on a sullen ground:
My reformation glittering over my fault,
Shall show more goodly, and attract more eyes,
Then that which has no soil to set it off.
I Will so offend, to make offense a skill,
Redeeming time, when men think least I will.

My blood has been too cold and temperate,
Unapt to stir at these indignities,
And you have found me; for accordingly,
You tread upon my patience: But be sure,
I will from henceforth rather be my Self,
Mighty, and to be feared, then my condition
Which has been smooth as Oil, soft as young Down,
And therefore lost that Title of respect,
Which the proud soul never pays, but to the proud.

Our house (my Sovereign Liege) little deserves
The scourge of greatness to be used on it,
And that same greatness too, which our own hands
Have help to make so portly.

My Lord.


Worcester get thee gone: for I do see
Danger and disobedience in thine eye.
O sir, your presence is too bold and peremptory,
And Majesty might never yet endure
The moody Frontier of a servant brow,
You have good leave to leave us. When we need
Your use and counsel, we shall send for you.
You were about to speak.

Yea, my good Lord.
Those Prisoners in your Highness demanded,
Which Harry Percy here at Holmedon took,
Were (as he says) not with such strength denied
As was delivered to your Majesty:
Who either through envy, or misprision,
Was guilty of this fault; and not my Son.

My Liege, I did deny no Prisoners.
But, I remember when the fight was done,
When I was dry with Rage, and extreme Toil,
Breathless, and Faint, leaning upon my Sword,
Came there a certain Lord, neat and trimly dressed;
Fresh as a Bridegroom, and his Chin new reapt,
Showed like a stubble Land at Harvest home.
He was perfumed like a Milliner,
And 'twixt his Finger and his Thumb, he held
A Pouncet-box: which ever and anon
He gave his Nose, and took't away again:
Who therewith angry, when it next came there,
Took it in Snuff: And still he smiled and talked:
And as the Soldiers bare dead bodies by,
He called them untaught Knaves, Unmannerly,
To bring a slouenly unhandsome Coarse
Betwixt the Wind, and his Nobility.
With many Holiday and Lady term
He questioned me: Among the rest, demanded
My Prisoners, in your Majesty's behalf.
I then, all-smarting, with my wounds being cold,
(To be so pestered with a Popingay)
Out of my Grief, and my Impatience,
Answered (neglectingly) I know not what,
He should, or should not: For he made me mad,
To see him shine so brisk, and smell so sweet;
And talk so like a Waiting-Gentlewoman,
Of Guns, and Drums, and Wounds: God save the mark;
And telling me, the Soueraign'st thing on earth
Was Parmacity, for an inward bruise:
And that it was great pity, so it was,
That villainous Saltpeter should be dug
Out of the Bowels of the harmless Earth,
Which many a good Tall Fellow had destroyed
So Cowardly. And but for these vile Gunnes*
He would himself have been a Soldier.
This bald, unjointed Chat of his (my Lord)
Made me to answer indirectly (as I said.)
And I beseech you, let not this report
Come current for an Accusation,
Betwixt my Love, and your high Majesty*

The circumstance considered, good my Lord,
What ever Harry Percie then had said,
To such a person, and in such a place,
At such a time, with all the rest retold,
May reasonably dye, and never rise
To do him wrong or any way impeach
What then he said, so he unsay it now.

Why yet does deny his Prisoners,
But with Prouiso and Exception,
That we at our own charge, shall ransom straight
His Brother-in-Law, the foolish Mortimer,
Who (in my soul) has wilfully betrayed
The lives of those, that he did lead to Fight,
Against the great Magitian, damned Glendower:
Whose daughter (as we hear) the Earl of March
Has lately married. Shall our Coffers then,
Be emptied, to redeem a Traitor home?
Shall we buy Treason? and indent with Fears,
When they have lost and forfeyted themselves.
No: on the barren Mountain let him sterue:
For I shall never hold that man my Friend,
Whose tongue shall ask me for one penny cost
To ransom home revolted Mortimer.

Revolted Mortimer?
He never did fall off, my Sovereign Liege,
But by the chance of War: to prove that true,
Needs no more but one tongue. For all those Wounds,
Those mouthed Wounds, which valiantly he took,
When on the gentle Seuernes siedgie bank,
In single Opposition hand to hand,
He did confound the best part of an hour
In changing hardiment with great Glendower:
Three times they breathed, and three times did they drink
Upon agreement, of swift Seuernes flood;
Who then affrighted with their bloody looks,
Ran fearfully among the trembling Reeds,
And hid his crispe-head in the hollow bank,
Blood-stained with these Valiant Combatants.
Never did base and rotten Policy
Color her working with such deadly wounds;
Nor never could the Noble Mortimer
Receive so many, and all willingly:
Then let him not be sland'red with Revolt.

Thou do belly him Percy, thou do belly him;
He never did encounter with Glendower:
I tell thee, he durst as well have met the devil alone,
As Owen Glendower for an enemy.
Art thou not ashamed? But Sirrah, henceforth
Let me not hear you speak of Mortimer.
Send me your Prisoners with the speediest means,
Or you shall hear in such a kind from me
As will displease ye. My Lord Northumberland,
We License your departure with your son,
Send us your Prisoners, or you will hear of it.

And if the devil come and roar for them
I will not send them. I will after straight
And tell him so: for I will ease my heart,
Although it be with hazard of my head.

What? drunk with choler? stay and pause awhile.
Here comes your Uncle.

Speak of Mortimer?
Yes, I will speak of him, and let my soul
Want mercy, if I do not join with him.
In his behalf, I Will empty all these Veins,
And shed my dear blood drop by drop in th dust,
But I will lift the downfall Mortimer
As high in th Air, as this Unthankful King,
As this Ingrate and Cankred Bullingbrooke.

Brother, the King has made your Nephew mad


Who struck this heat up after I was gone?


He will (forsooth) have all my Prisoners:
And when I urged the ransom once again
Of my Wives Brother, then his cheek looked pale,
And on my face he turned an eye of death,
Trembling even at the name of Mortimer.

I cannot blame him: was he not proclaimed
By Richard that dead is, the next of blood?

He was: I heard the Proclamation,
And then it was, when the unhappy King
(Whose wrongs in us God pardon) did set forth
Upon his Irish Expedition:
From whence he intercepted, did return
To be deposed, and shortly murdered.

And for whose death, we in the worlds wide mouth
Live scandalized, and foully spoken of.

But soft I pray you; did King Richard then
Proclaim my brother Mortimer,
Heir to the Crown?

He did, my self did hear it.


Nay then I cannot blame his Cousin King,
That wished him on the barren Mountains starved.
But shall it be, that you that set the Crown
Upon the head of this forgetful man,
And for his sake, wore the detested blot
Of murtherous subornation? Shall it be,
That you a world of curses undergo,
Being the Agents, or base second means,
The Cords, the Ladder, or the Hangman rather?
O pardon, if that I descend so low,
To show the Line, and the Predicament
Wherein you range under this subtle King.
Shall it for shame, be spoken in these days,
Or fill up Chronicles in time to come,
That men of your Nobility and Power,
Did gage them both in an unjust behalf
(As Both of you, God pardon it, have done)
To put down Richard, that sweet lovely Rose,
And plant this Thorn, this Canker Bullingbrooke?
And shall it in more shame be further spoken,
That you are fooled, discarded, and shook off
By him, for whom these shames ye underwent?
No: yet time serves, wherein you may redeem
Your banished Honors, and restore your selves
Into the good Thoughts of the world again.
Revenge the geering and disdained contempt
Of this proud King, who studies day and night
To answer all the Debt he owes unto you,
Even with the bloody Payment of your deaths:
Therefore I say --

Peace Cousin, say no more.
And now I will unclasp a Secret book,
And to your quick conceyuing Discontents,
I Will read you Matter, deep and dangerous,
As full of peril and aduenturous Spirit,
As to o're-walke a Current, roaring loud
On the unsteadfast footing of a Spear.

If he fall in, good night, or sink or swim:
Send danger from the East unto the West,
So Honor cross it from the North to South,
And let them grapple: The blood more stirs
To rowze a Lion, then to start a Hare.

Imagination of some great exploit,
Drives him beyond the bounds of Patience.

By heaven, me thinks it were an easy leap,
To pluck bright Honor from the pale-faced Moon,
Or diue into the bottom of the deep,
Where Fadome-line could never touch the ground,
And pluck up drowned Honor by the Locks:
So he that does redeem her thence, might wear
Without Co-riuall, all her Dignities:
But out upon this halfe-fac'd Fellowship.

He apprehends a World of Figures here,
But not the form of what he should attend:
Good Cousin give me audience for awhile,
And list to me.

I cry you mercy.


Those same Noble Scotts
That are your Prisoners.

I Will keep them all.
By heaven, he shall not have a Scot of them:
No, if a Scot would save his Soul, he shall not.
I Will keep them, by this Hand.

You start away,
And lend no ear unto my purposes.
Those Prisoners you shall keep.

Nay, I will; that is flat:
He said, he would not ransom Mortimer:
Forbad my tongue to speak of Mortimer.
But I will find him when he lies asleep,
And in his ear, I Will holla Mortimer.
Nay, I Will have a Starling shall be taught to speak
Nothing but Mortimer, and give it him,
To keep his anger still in motion.

Hear you Cousin: a word.


All studies here I solemnly defy,
Save how to gall and pinch this Bullingbrooke,
And that same Sword and Buckler Prince of Wales.
But that I think his Father loves him not,
And would be glad he met with some mischance,
I would have poisoned him with a pot of Ale.

Farewell Kinsman: I Will talk to you
When you are better tempered to attend.

Why what a Waspe-tongu'd and impatient fool
Art thou, to break into this Woman's mood,
Tying thine ear to no tongue but thine own?

Why look you, I am whipped and scourged with rods,
Netled, and stung with Pismires, when I hear
Of this vile Politician Bullingbrooke.
In Richards time: What de'ye call the place?
A plague upon it, it is in Gloustershire:
'Twas, where the madcap Duke his Uncle kept,
His Uncle York, where I first bowed my knee
Unto this King of Smiles, this Bullingbrooke:
When you and he came back from Rauenspurgh.

At Barkley Castle.


You say true:
Why what a caudie deal of courtesy,
This fawning Greyhound then did proffer me.
Look when his infant Fortune came to age,
And gentle Harry Percy, and kind Cousin:
O, the Devil take such Couzeners, God forgive me,
Good Uncle tell your tale, for I have done.

Nay, if you have not, to it again,
We Will stay your leisure.

I have done insooth.


Then once more to your Scottish Prisoners.
Deliver them up without their ransom straight,
And make the Douglas son your only mean
For powers in Scotland: which for diverse reasons
Which I shall send you written, be assured
Will easily be granted you, my Lord.
Your Son in Scotland being thus implied,
Shall secretly into the bosom creep
Of that same noble Prelate, well beloved,
The Archbishop.

Of York, is it not?


True, who bears hard
His Brothers death at Bristow, the Lord Scroope.
I speak not this in estimation,
As what I think might be, but what I know
Is ruminated, plotted, and set down,
And only stays but to behold the face
Of that occasion that shall bring it on.

I smell it:
Upon my life, it will do wondrous well.

Before the game's a-foot, thou still let'st slip.


Why, it cannot choose but be a Noble plot,
And then the power of Scotland, and of York
To join with Mortimer, Ha.

And so they shall.


Infaith it is exceedingly well aimed.


And it is no little reason bids us speed,
To save our heads, by raising of a Head:
For, bear our selves as even as we can,
The King will always think him in our debt,
And think, we think our selves unsatisfied,
Till he has found a time to pay us home.
And see already, how he does begin
To make us strangers to his looks of love.

He does, he does; we will be revenged on him.


Cousin, farewell. No further go in this,
Then I by Letters shall direct your course
When time is ripe, which will be suddenly:
I Will steal to Glendower, and lo, Mortimer,
Where you, and Douglas, and our powers at once,
As I will fashion it, shall happily meet,
To bear our fortunes in our own strong arms,
Which now we hold at much uncertainty.

Farewell good Brother, we shall thrive, I trust.


Uncle, adieu: O let the hours be short,
Till fields, and blows, and groans, applaud our sport.

Heigh-ho, an't be not four by the day, I Will be hanged. Charles waine is over
the new Chimney, and yet our horse not packt. What Ostler


Anon, anon.


I prithee Tom, beat Cuts Saddle, put a few Flocks in the point: the poor
Jade is wrung in the withers, out of all cesse


Pease and Beans are as danke here as a Dog, and this is the next way to give
poor Iades the Bottes: This house is turned vpside down since Robin the
Ostler dyed


Poor fellow never joyed since the price of oats rose, it was the death of him.


I think this is the most villainous house in all London rode for Fleas: I am
stung like a Tench


Like a Tench? There is never a King in Christendom, could be better bit, then
I have been since the first Cock


Why, you will allow us never a Iourden, and then we leake in your Chimney: and
your Chamber-lye breeds Fleas like a Loach


What Ostler, come away, and be hanged: come away.


I have a Gammon of Bacon, and two razes of Ginger, to be delivered as far as
Charing-crosse


The Turkies in my Pannier are quite starued. What Ostler? A plague on thee,
have thou never an eye in thy head? Can not hear? And it were not as good a
deed as drink, to break the pate of thee, I am a very Villain. Come and be
hanged, have no faith in thee


Good Morrow Carriers. What Is a clock?


I think it be two a clock.


I prithee lend me thy Lantern to see my Gelding in the stable.


Nay soft I pray ye, I know a trick worth two of that.


I prithee lend me thine.


I, when, can tell? Lend me thy Lantern (quoth-a) marry I Will see thee
hanged first


Sir Carrier: What time do you mean to come to London?


Time enough to go to bed with a Candle, I warrant thee. Come neighbor
Mugges, we will call up the Gentlemen, they will along with company, for they
have great charge


What ho, Chamberlain?


At hand quoth Pick-purse.


That Is even as fair, as at hand quoth the Chamberlain: For thou variest no
more from picking of Purses, then giving direction, does from laboring. Thou
lay'st the plot, how


Good morrow Master Gads-Hill, it holds current that I told you yesternight.
There Is a Franklin in the wild of Kent, has brought three hundred Marks with
him in Gold: I heard him tell it to one of his company last night at Supper; a
kind of Auditor, one that has abundance of charge too (God knows what) they
are up already, and call for Eggs and Butter. They will away presently


Sir, if they meet not with S. Nicholas Clarks,
I Will give thee this neck.

No, I Will none of it: I prithee keep that for the Hangman, for I know thou
worshipst S. Nicholas as truly as a man of falsehood may


What talkest thou to me of the Hangman? If I hang, I Will make a fat pair of
Gallows. For, if I hang, old Sir John hangs with me, and thou know he is
no Starueling. Tut, there are other Trojans that you dream'st not of, the which
(for sport sake) are content to do the Profession some grace; that would (if
matters should be looked into) for their own Credit sake, make all Whole. I
am joined with no Foot-land-Rakers, no Long-staffe six-penny strikers, none of
these mad Mustachio-purplehu'd-Maltwormes, but with Nobility and Tranquillity;
Bourgomasters, and great Oneyers, such as can hold in, such as will strike
sooner then speak; and speak sooner then drink, and drink sooner then pray:
and yet I lie, for they pray continually unto their Saint the Commonwealth; or
rather, not to pray to her, but prey on her: for they tide up and down on her,
and make her their Boots


What, the Commonwealth their Boots? Will she hold out water in foul way?


She will, she will; Justice has liquor'd her. We steal as in a Castle,
cocksure: we have the receipt of Fernseede, we walk invisible


Nay, I think rather, you are more beholding to the Night, then to the
Fernseed, for your walking invisible


Give me thy hand.
Thou shall have a share in our purpose,
As I am a true man.

Nay, rather let me have it, as you are a false Thief.


Go too: Homo is a common name to all men. Bid the Ostler bring the Gelding
out of the stable. Farewell ye muddy Knave


Come shelter, shelter, I have removed Falstafs Horse, and he frets like a
gum'd Velvet


Stand close.


Poines, Poines, and be hanged Poines.


Peace ye fat-kidney'd Rascal, what a brawling do thou keep.


What Poines. Hal?


He is walked up to the top of the hill, I Will go seek him.


I am accursed to rob in that Thief company: that Rascal has removed my
Horse, and tied him I know not where. If I travel but four foot by the squire
further a foot, I shall break my wind. Well, I doubt not but to dye a fair
death for all this, if I escape hanging for killing that Rogue, I have forsworn
his company hourly any time this two and twenty year, and yet I am bewitched
with the Rogues company. If the Rascal have not given me medicines to make me
love him, I Will behang'd; it could not be else: I have drunk Medicines. Poines,
Hal, a Plague upon you both. Bardolph, Peto: I Will starve ere I rob a foot
further. And 'twere not as good a deed as to drink, to turn True-man, and to
leave these Rogues, I am the veriest Varlet that ever chewed with a Tooth.
Eight yards of uneven ground, is threescore and ten miles afoot with me: and
the stony-hearted Villains know it well enough. A plague upon it, when Thieves
cannot be true one to another


a plague light upon you all. Give my Horse you


give me my Horse, and be hanged.


Peace ye fat guts, lie down, lay thine ear close to the ground, and list
if thou can hear the tread of Travelers


Have you any Leauers to lift me up again being down? I Will not bear mine own
flesh so far afoot again, for all the coin in thy Fathers Exchequer. What a
plague mean ye to colt me thus


Thou lie, thou art not colted, thou art vncolted.


I prithee good Prince Hal, help me to my horse, good Kings son.


Out you Rogue, shall I be your Ostler?


Go hang thy self in thine own heire-apparant-Garters: If I be taken, I Will
peach for this: and I have not Ballads made on all, and sung to filthy tunes,
let a Cup of Sack be my poison: when a jest is so forward, and a foot too, I
hate it


Stand.


So I do against my will.


O it is our Setter, I know his voice:
Bardolfe, what news?

Case ye, case ye; on with your Vizards, there is money of the Kings coming
down the hill, it is going to the Kings Exchequer


You lie you rogue, it is going to the Kings Tauern.


There Is enough to make us all.


To he hanged.


You four shall front them in the narrow Lane: Ned and I, will walk lower; if
they escape from your encounter, then they light on us


But how many be of them?


Some eight or ten.


Will they not rob us?


What, a Coward Sir John Paunch?


Indeed I am not John of Gaunt your Grandfather; but yet no Coward, Hal.


We Will leave that to the proof.


Sir Jack, thy horse stands behind the hedge, when thou need'st him, there
thou shall find him. Farewell, and stand fast


Now cannot I strike him, if I should be hanged.


Ned, where are our disguises?


Here hard by: Stand close.


Now my Masters, happy man be his dole, say I: every man to his business.


Come Neighbor: the boy shall lead our Horses down the hill: We Will walk
a-foot a while, and ease our Legs


Stay.


Jesus bless us.


Strike* down with them, cut the villains throats; a whoreson Caterpillars:
Bacon-fed Knaves, they hate us youth; down with them, fleece them


O, we are undone, both we and ours for ever.


Hang ye gorbellied knaves, are you undone? No ye Fat Chuffes, I would your
store were here. On Bacons on* what ye knaves? Young men must live, you are
Grand Iurers, are ye? We Will iure ye in faith


The Thieves have bound the True-men: Now could thou and I rob the Thieves, and
go merrily to London, it would be argument for a Week, Laughter for a Month,
and a good jest for ever


Stand close, I hear them coming.


Come my Masters, let us share, and then to horse before day: and the Prince
and Poynes be not two arrand Cowards, there is no equity stirring. There Is no
more valor in that Poynes, than in a wild Ducke


Your money.


Villains.


Got with much ease. Now merrily to Horse: The Thieves are scattred, and
possessed with fear so strongly, that they dare not meet each other: each takes
his fellow for an Officer. Away good Ned, Falstaff sweates to death, and Lards
the lean earth as he walks along were not for laughing, I should pity him


How the Rogue roared.


But for mine own part, my Lord, I could be well contented to be there, in
respect of the love I bear your house

He could be contented: Why is he not then? in respect of the love he bears
our house. He shows in this, he loves his own Barn better then he loves our
house. Let me see some more. The purpose you undertake is dangerous. Why that is
certain: It Is dangerous to take a Cold, to sleep, to drink: but I tell you
(my Lord fool) out of this Nettle, Danger; we pluck this Flower, Safety. The
purpose you undertake is dangerous, the Friends you have named uncertain, the
Time it self vnsorted, and your whole Plot too light, for the counterpoize of
so great an Opposition. Say you so, say you so: I say unto you again, you are
a shallow cowardly Hind, and you Lie. What a lacke-braine is this? I protest,
our plot is as good a plot as ever was laid; our Friend true and constant: A
good Plotte, good Friends, and full of expectation: An excellent plot, very
good Friends. What a Frosty-spirited rogue is this? Why, my Lord of York
commends the plot, and the general course of the action. By this hand, if I
were now by this Rascal, I could brain him with his Ladies Fan. Is there not
my Father, my Uncle, and my Self, Lord Edmund Mortimer, my Lord of York, and
Owen Glendour? Is there not besides, the Douglas? Have I not all their letters,
to meet me in Arms by the ninth of the next Month? and are they not some of
them set forward already? What a Pagan Rascal is this? An Infidel. Ha, you
shall see now in very sincerity of Fear and Cold heart, will he to the King,
and lay open all our proceedings. O, I could divide my self, and go to
buffets, for moving such a dish of skim'd Milk with so honorable an Action.
Hang him, let him tell the King we are prepared. I will set forwards to night

How now Kate, I must leave you within these two hours.


O my good Lord, why are you thus alone?
For what offense have I this fortnight bin
A banished woman from my Harries bed?
Tell me (sweet Lord) what is it that takes from thee
Thy stomach, pleasure, and thy golden sleep?
Why do thou bend thine eyes upon the earth?
And start so often when thou sitt'st alone?
Why have thou lost the fresh blood in thy cheeks?
And given my Treasures and my rights of thee,
To thicke-ey'd musing, and cursed melancholy?
In my faint-slumbers, I by thee have watched,
And heard thee murmore tales of Iron Wars:
Speak terms of manage to thy bounding Steed,
Cry courage to the field. And thou have talked
Of Sallies, and Retires; Trenches, Tents,
Of Palizadoes, Frontiers, Parapets,
Of Basiliskes, of Canon, Culuerin,
Of Prisoners ransom, and of Soldiers slain,
And all the current of a headdy fight.
Thy spirit within thee has been so at War,
And thus has so bestirred thee in thy sleep,
That beds of sweat has stood upon thy Brow,
Like bubbles in a late-disturbed Stream;
And in thy face strange motions have appeared,
Such as we see when men restrain their breath
On some great sudden have. O what portents are these?
Some heavy business has my Lord in hand,
And I must know it: else he loves me not.

What ho; Is Gilliams with the Packet gone?


He is my Lord, an hour agone.


Has Butler brought those horses from the Sheriff?


One horse, my Lord, he brought even now.


What Horse? A Roane, a crop ear, is it not.


It is my Lord.


That Roane shall be my Throne. Well, I will back him straight. Esperance, bid
Butler lead him forth into the Park


But hear you, my Lord.


What say thou my Lady?


What is it carries you away?


Why, my horse (my Love) my horse.


Out you mad-headed Ape, a Weazell has not such a deal of Spleen, as you are
tossed with. In sooth I Will know your business Harry, that I will. I fear my
Brother Mortimer does stir about his Title, and has sent for you to line his
enterprise. But if you go --


So far a foot, I shall be weary, Love.


Come, come, you Paraquito, answer me directly unto this question, that I shall
ask. Indeed I Will break thy little finger Harry, if thou will not tell me true


Away, away you trifler: Love, I love thee not,
I care not for thee Kate: this is no world
To play with Mammets, and to tilt with lips.
We must have bloody Noses, and cracked Crowns,
And pass them current too. Gods me, my horse.
What say thou Kate? what wold'st thou have with me?

Do ye not love me? Do ye not indeed?
Well, do not then. For since you love me not,
I will not love my self. Do you not love me?
Nay, tell me if thou speak in jest, or no.

Come, will thou see me ride?
And when I am a horseback, I will swear
I love thee infinitely. But hark you Kate,
I must not have you henceforth, question me,
Whether I go: nor reason whereabout.
Whether I must, I must: and to conclude,
This Evening must I leave thee, gentle Kate.
I know you wise, but yet no further wise
Then Harry Percies wife. Constant you are,
But yet a woman: and for secrecy,
No Lady closer. For I will believe
Thou will not utter what thou do not know,
And so far wilt I trust thee, gentle Kate.

How so far?


Not an inch further. But hark you Kate,
Whither I go, thither shall you go too:
To day will I set forth, to morrow you.
Will this content you Kate?

It must of force.


Ned, prithee come out of that fat room, and lend me thy hand to laugh a
little


Where have been Hall?


With three or four Logger-heads, amongst 3. or fourscore Hogsheads. I have
sounded the very base string of humility. Sir, I am sworn brother to a leash
of Drawers, and can call them by their names, as Tom, Dicke, and Francis. They
take it already upon their confidence, that though I be but Prince of Wales,
yet I am the King of Courtesy: telling me flatly I am no proud lack like
Falstaff, but a Corinthian, a lad of mettle, a good boy, and when I am King of
England, I shall command all the good Laddes in East-cheape. They call drinking
deep, dying Scarlet; and when you breath in your watering, then they try hem,
and bid you play it off. To conclude, I am so good a proficient in one quarter
of an hour, that I can drink with any Tinker in his own Language during my
life. I tell thee Ned, thou have lost much honor, that thou were not with me
in this action: but sweet Ned, to sweeten which name of Ned, I give thee this
peniworth of Sugar, clapped even now into my hand by an under Skinker, one that
never spoke other English in his life, then Eight shillings and six pence, and,
You are welcome: with this shril addition, Anon, Anon sir, Score a Pint of
Bastard in the Half Moon, or so. But Ned, to drive away time till Falstaff
come, I prithee do thou stand in some by-roome, while I question my puny
Drawer, to what end he gave me the Sugar, and do never leave calling Francis,
that his Tale to me may be nothing but, Anon: step aside, and I Will show thee a
President


Francis.


Thou art perfect.


Francis.


Anon, anon sir; look down into the Pomgarnet, Ralfe.


Come hither Francis.


My Lord.


How long have thou to serve, Francis?


Forsooth five years, and as much as to --


Francis.


Anon, anon sir.


Five years: Betlady a long Lease for the clinking of Pewter. But Francis,
dare thou be so valiant, as to play the coward with thy Indenture, and show
it a fair pair of heels, and run from it


O Lord sir, I Will be sworn upon all the Books in England, I could find in my
heart


Francis.


Anon, anon sir.


How old art thou, Francis?


Let me see, about Michaelmas next I shall be --


Francis.


Anon sir, pray you stay a little, my Lord.


Nay but hark you Francis, for the Sugar thou gave me, 'twas a penyworth,
was it not


O Lord sir, I would it had been two.


I will give thee for it a thousand pound: Ask me when thou will, and thou
shall have it


Francis.


Anon, anon.


Anon Francis? No Francis, but to morrow Francis: or Francis, on thursday: or
indeed Francis when thou will. But Francis


My Lord.


Will thou rob this Leatherne Ierkin, Crystal button, Not-pated, Agat ring,
Puke stocking, Caddice garter, Smooth tongue, Spanish pouch


O Lord sir, who do you mean?


Why then your brown Bastard is your only drink: for look you Francis, your
white Canuas doublet will sulley. In Barbary sir, it cannot come to so much


What sir?


Francis.


Away you Rogue, do thou hear them call?
Here they both call him, the Drawer stands amazed, not knowing which way to
go.

What, stand'st thou still, and hear'st such a calling? Look to the Guests
within. My Lord, old Sir John with half a dozen more, are at the door: shall
I let them in


Let them alone awhile, and then open the door. Poines.


Anon, anon sir.


Sir, Falstaff and the rest of the Thieves, are at the door, shall we be
merry


As merry as Crickets my Lad. But hark ye, What cunning match have you made
with this jest of the Drawer? Come, what is the issue


I am now of all humors, that have showed themselves humors, since the old
days of goodman Adam, to the pupil age of this present twelve a clock at
midnight. What Is a clock Francis


Anon, anon sir.


That ever this Fellow should have fewer words then a Parret, and yet the son
of a Woman. His industry is vp-staires and down-staires, his eloquence the
parcel of a reckoning. I am not yet of Percies mind, the Hotspurre of the
North, he that killes me some six or seven dozen of Scots at a Breakfast,
washes his hands, and says to his wife; Fie upon this quiet life, I want
work. O my sweet Harry says she, how many have thou killed to day? Give my
Roane horse a drench (says he) and answers, some fourteen, an hour after:
a trifle, a trifle. I prithee call in Falstaff, I Will play Percy, and that
damned Brawne shall play Dame Mortimer his wife. Rino, says the drunkard. Call
in Ribs, call in Tallow


Welcome Jack, where have thou been?


A plague of all Cowards I say, and a Vengeance too, marry and Amen. Give me a
cup of Sack Boy. Ere I lead this life long, I Will sow nether stocks, and mend
them too. A plague of all cowards. Give me a Cup of Sack, Rogue. Is there no
Virtue extant


Did thou never see Titan kiss a dish of Butter, pitiful hearted Titan
that melted at the sweet Tale of the Sun? If thou did, then behold that
compound


You Rogue, here is Lime in this Sack too: there is nothing but Roguery to be
found in Villainous man; yet a Coward is worse then a Cup of Sack with lime. A
villainous Coward, go thy ways old Jack, die when thou will, if manhood, good
manhood be not forgot upon the face of the earth, then am I a shotten Herring:
there lines not three good men vnhang'd in England, and one of them is fat, and
grows old, God help the while, a bad world I say. I would I were a Weauer, I
could sing all manner of songs. A plague of all Cowards, I say still


How now Woolsacke, what mutter you?


A Kings Son? If I do not beat thee out of thy Kingdom with a dagger of
Lath, and drive all thy Subjects before thee like a flock of Wilde-geese, I Will
never wear hair on my face more. You Prince of Wales


Why you horson round man? what is the matter?


Are you not a Coward? Answer me to that, and Poines there?


Ye fatch paunch, and ye call me Coward, I Will stab thee.


I call thee Coward? I Will see thee damned ere I call the Coward: but I would
give a thousand pound I could run as fast as thou can. You are straight
enough in the shoulders, you care not who sees your back: Call you that
backing of your friends? a plague upon such backing: give me them that will
face me. Give me a Cup of Sack, I am a Rogue if I drunk to day


O Villain, thy Lips are scarce wiped, since thou drunk'st last.


All Is one for that.
A plague of all Cowards still, say I.

What Is the matter?


What Is the matter? here be four of us, have taken a thousand pound this
Morning


Where is it, Jack? where is it?


Where is it? taken from us, it is: a hundred upon poor four of us.


What, a hundred, man?


I am a Rogue, if I were not at half Sword with a dozen of them two hours
together. I have escaped by miracle. I am eight times thrust through the
Doublet, four through the Hose, my Buckler cut through and through, my Sword
hackt like a Hand-saw, ecce signum. I never dealt better since I was a man: all
would not do. A plague of all Cowards: let them speak; if they speak more or
less then truth, they are villains, and the sons of darkness


Speak sirs, how was it?


We four set upon some dozen.


Sixteen, at least, my Lord.


And bound them.


No, no, they were not bound.


You Rogue, they were bound, every man of them, or I am a Jew else, an Ebrew
Jew


As we were sharing, some six or seven fresh men set upon us.


And unbound the rest, and then come in the other.


What, fought ye with them all?


All? I know not what ye call all: but if I fought not with fifty of them, I
am a bunch of Radish: if there were not two or three and fifty upon poor old
Jack, then am I no two-legg'd Creature


Pray Heaven, you have not murdered some of them.


Nay, that is past praying for, I have peppered two of them: Two I am sure I
have paid, two Rogues in Buckrom Suits. I tell thee what, Hal, if I tell thee
a Lie, spit in my face, call me Horse: thou know my old word: here I lay,
and thus I bore my point; four Rogues in Buckrom let drive at me


What, four? thou sayd'st but two, even now.


Four Hal, I told thee four.


I, I, he said four.


These four came all a-front, and mainely thrust at me; I made no more ado,
but took all their seven points in my Targuet, thus


Seven? why there were but four, even now.


In Buckrom.


I, four, in Buckrom Suits.


Seven, by these Hilts, or I am a Villain else.


Prithee let him alone, we shall have more anon.


Do thou hear me, Hal?


I, and mark thee too, Jack.


Do so, for it is worth the listening too: these nine in Buckrom, that I told
thee of


So, two more already.


Their Points being broken.


Down fell his Hose.


Began to give me ground: but I followed me close, came in foot and hand; and
with a thought, seven of the eleven I paid


O monstrous! eleven Buckrom men grown out of two?


But as the Devil would have it, three mis-begotten Knaves, in Kendall Green,
came at my Back, and let drive at me; for it was so dark, Hal, that thou
could not see thy Hand


These Lies are like the Father that begets them, gross as a Mountain, open,
palpable. Why thou Clay-brayn'd Guts, thou Knotty-pated Fool, thou Horson
obscene greasy Tallow Catch


What, art thou mad? art thou mad? is not the truth, the truth?


Why, how could thou know these men in Kendall Green, when it was so dark,
thou could not see thy Hand? Come, tell us your reason: what say thou to
this


Come, your reason Jack, your reason.


What, upon compulsion? No: were I at the Strappado, or all the Racks in the
World, I would not tell you on compulsion. Give you a reason on compulsion? If
Reasons were as plenty as Black-berries, I would give no man a Reason upon
compulsion, I


I Will be no longer guilty of this sin. This sanguine Coward, this
Bed-presser, this Hors-back-breaker, this huge Hill of Flesh


Away you Starueling, you Elfe-skin, you dried Neats tongue, Bulles-pissell,
you stocke-fish: O for breath to utter. What is like thee? You Tailors yard, you
sheath you Bow-case, you vile standing tucke


Well, breath awhile, and then to it again: and when thou have tired thy self
in base comparisons, hear me speak but thus


Mark Jack.


We two, saw you four set on four and bound them, and were Masters of their
Wealth: mark now how a plain Tale shall put you down. Then did we two, set on
you four, and with a word, outfac'd you from your prize, and have it: yea, and
can show it you in the House. And Falstaff, you carried your Guts away as
nimbly, with as quick dexterity, and roared for mercy, and still ran and
roared, as ever I heard Bull-Calfe. What a Slave art thou, to hacke thy sword
as thou have done, and then say it was in fight. What trick? what devices? what
starting hole can thou now find out, to hide thee from this open and apparent
shame


Come, let us hear Jack: What trick have thou now?


I knew ye as well as he that made ye. Why hear ye my Masters, was it for me
to kill the Heir apparent? Should I turn upon the true Prince? Why, thou
know I am as valiant as Hercules: but beware Instinct, the Lion will not
touch the true Prince: Instinct is a great matter. I was a Coward on Instinct:
I shall think the better of my self, and thee, during my life: I, for a
valiant Lion, and thou for a true Prince. But Lads, I am glad you have the
Money. Hostess, clap to the doors: watch to night, pray to morrow. Gallants,
Lads, Boys, Hearts of Gold, all the good Titles of Fellowship come to you.
What, shall we be merry? shall we have a Play extempory


Content, and the argument shall be, thy running away.


A, no more of that Hall, and thou love me.


My Lord, the Prince?


How now my Lady the Hostess, what say thou to me?


Marry, my Lord, there is a Noble man of the Court at door would speak with
you: he says, he comes from your Father


Give him as much as will make him a Royal man* and send him back again to
my Mother


What manner of man is he?


An old man.


What does Gravity out of his Bed at Midnight?
Shall I give him his answer?

Prithee do Jack.


'Faith, and I Will send him packing.


Now Sirs: you fought fair; so did you Peto, so did you Bardol: you are Lions
too, you ran away upon instinct: you will not touch the true Prince; no, fie


'Faith, I ran when I saw others run.


Tell me now in earnest, how came Falstaffes Sword so hackt?


Why, he hackt it with his Dagger, and said, he would swear truth out of
England, but he would make you believe it was done in fight, and persuaded us
to do the like


Yea, and to tickle our Noses with Spear-grasse, to make them bleed, and then
to beslubber our garments with it, and swear it was the blood of true men. I
did that I did not this seven years before, I blushed to hear his monstrous
devices


O Villain, thou stolest a Cup of Sack eighteen years ago, and were taken
with the manner, and ever since thou have blushed extempore: thou had fire and
sword on thy side, and yet thou ranst away; what instinct had thou for it


My Lord, do you see these Meteors? do you behold these Exhalations?


I do.


What think you they portend?


Hot Livers, and cold Purses.


Choler, my Lord, if rightly taken.


No, if rightly taken, Halter.

Here comes lean Jack, here comes bare-bone. How now my sweet Creature of
Bombast, how long is it ago, Jack, since thou saw thine own Knee


My own Knee? When I was about thy years (Hal) I was not an Eagles Talent in
the Waste, I could have crept into any Aldermans Thumbe-Ring: a plague of
sighing and grief, it blows a man up like a Bladder. There Is villainous News
abroad: here was Sir John Braby from your Father; you must go to the Court in
the Morning. The same mad fellow of the North, Percy; and he of Wales, that
gave Amamon the Bastinado, and made Lucifer Cuckold, and swore the Devil his
true Liege-man upon the Cross of a Welch-hooke; what a plague call you him


O, Glendower.


Owen, Owen; the same, and his Son in Law Mortimer, and old Northumberland,
and the sprightly Scot of Scots, Douglas, that runs a Horseback up a Hill
perpendicular


He that rides at high speed, and with a Pistol kills a Sparrow flying.


You have hit it.


So did he never the Sparrow.


Well, that Rascal has good metal in him, he will not run.


Why, what a Rascal art thou then, to praise him so for running?


A Horseback (ye Cuckoe) but a foot he will not budge a foot.


Yes Jack, upon instinct.


I grant ye, upon instinct: Well, he is there too, and one Mordake, and a
thousand blew-Cappes more. Worcester is stolen away by Night: thy Fathers Beard
is turned white with the News; you may buy Land now as cheap as stinking
Mackrell


Then it is like, if there come a hot Sun, and this civil buffetting hold,
we shall buy Maiden-heads as they buy Hob-nayles, by the Hundreds


By the Mass Lad, thou say true, it is like we shall have good trading
that way. But tell me Hal, art not thou horrible afear'd? thou being Heir
apparent, could the World pick thee out three such Enemies again, as that
Fiend Douglas, that Spirit Percy, and that Devil Glendower? Art not thou
horrible afraid? Does not thy blood thrill at it


Not a whit: I lack some of thy instinct.


Well, thou will be horrible chidde to morrow, when thou come to thy Father:
if thou do love me, practice an answer


Do thou stand for my Father, and examine me upon the particulars of my Life.


Shall I? content: This Chair shall be my State, this Dagger my Scepter, and
this Cushion my Crown


Thy State is taken for a Ioyn'd-Stoole, thy Golden Scepter for a Leaden
Dagger, and thy precious rich Crown, for a pitiful bald Crown


Well, and the fire of Grace be not quite out of thee now shall thou be moved.
Give me a Cup of Sack to make mine eyes look read, that it may be thought I
have wept, for I must speak in passion, and I will do it in King Cambyses
vain


Well, here is my Leg.


And here is my speech: stand aside Nobility.


This is excellent sport, in faith.


Weep not, sweet Queen, for trickling tears are vain.


O the Father, how he holds his countenance?


For Gods sake Lords, convey my trustfull Queen,
For tears do stop the floud-gates of her eyes.

O rare, he does it as like one of these harlotry Players, as ever I see.


Peace good Pint-pot, peace good Tickle-braine. Harry, I do not only marvel
where thou spendest thy time; but also, how thou art accompanied: For though
the Camomile, the more it is trodden, the faster it grows; yet Youth, the more
it is wasted, the sooner it wears. Thou art my Son: I have partly thy
Mothers Word, partly my Opinion; but chiefly, a villainous trick of thine Eye,
and a foolish hanging of thy nether Lip, that does warrant me. If then thou
be Son to me, here lies the point: why, being Son to me, art thou so
poynted at? Shall the blessed Son of Heaven prove a Micher, and eat
Black-berryes? a question not to be asked. Shall the Son of England prove a
Thief, and take Purses? a question to be asked. There is a thing, Harry, which
thou have often heard of, and it is known to many in our Land, by the Name of
Pitch: this Pitch (as ancient Writers do report) does defile; so does the
company thou keep: for Harry, now I do not speak to thee in Drink, but
in Tears; not in Pleasure, but in Passion; not in Words only, but in Woes
also: and yet there is a virtuous man, whom I have often noted in thy company,
but I know not his Name


What manner of man, and it like your Majesty?


A goodly portly man in faith, and a corpulent, of a cheerful Look, a pleasing
Eye, and a most noble Carriage, and as I think, his age some fifty, or
(byrlady) inclining to threescore; and now I remember me, his Name is
Falstaff: if that man should be lewdly given, he deceiues me; for Harry, I
see Virtue in his Looks. If then the Tree may be known by the Fruit, as the
Fruit by the Tree, then peremptorily I speak it, there is Virtue in that
Falstaff: him keep with, the rest banish. And tell me now, thou naughty
Varlet, tell me, where have thou been this month


Do thou speak like a King? do thou stand for me, and I Will play my Father.


Depose me: if thou do it half so gravely, so maiestically, both in word
and matter, hang me up by the heels for a Rabbet-sucker, or a Poulters Hare


Well, here I am set.


And here I stand: judge my Masters.


Now Harry, whence come you?


My Noble Lord, from East-cheape.


The complaints I hear of thee, are grievous.


In Faith, my Lord, they are false: Nay, I Will tickle ye for a young Prince.


Swearest thou, ungracious Boy? henceforth never look on me: thou art
violently carried away from Grace: there is a Devil haunts thee, in the
likeness of a fat old Man; a Tun of Man is thy Companion: Why do thou
converse with that Trunk of Humors, that Boulting-Hutch of Beastliness, that
swollen Parcel of Dropsies, that huge Bombard of Sack, that stuffed Cloake-bagge
of Guts, that roasted Manning Tree Ox with the Pudding in his Belly, that
reverend Vice, that gray Iniquity, that Father Ruffian, that Vanity in
years? wherein is he good, but to taste Sack, and drink it? wherein neat and
cleanly, but to carue a Capon, and eat it? wherein Cunning, but in Craft?
wherein Crafty, but in Villainy? wherein Villainous, but in all things? wherein
worthy, but in nothing


I would your Grace would take me with you: whom means your Grace?


That villainous abominable mis-leader of Youth, Falstaff, that old
white-bearded Satan


My Lord, the man I know.


I know thou do.


But to say, I know more harm in him then in my self, were to say more then I
know. That he is old (the more the pity) his white hayres do witness it:
but that he is (saving your reverence) a Whore-master, that I utterly deny. If
Sack and Sugar be a fault, Heaven help the Wicked: if to be old and merry,
be a sin, then many an old Host that I know, is damned: if to be fat, be to
be hated, then Pharaohs lean Kine are to be loved. No, my good Lord, banish
Peto, banish Bardolph, banish Poines: but for sweet Jack Falstaff, kind
Jack Falstaff, true Jack Falstaff, valiant Jack Falstaff, and therefore
more valiant, being as he is old Jack Falstaff, banish not him thy Harryes
company, banish not him thy Harryes company; banish plumpe Jack, and banish
all the World


I do, I will.


O, my Lord, my Lord, the Sheriff, with a most most monstrous Watch, is at the
door


Out you Rogue, play out the Play: I have much to say in the behalf of that
Falstaff


O, my Lord, my Lord.


Heigh, heigh, the Devil rides upon a Fiddle-sticke: what is the matter?


The Sheriff and all the Watch are at the door: they are come to search the
House, shall I let them in


Do thou hear Hal, never call a true piece of Gold a Counterfeit: thou art
essentially made, without seeming so


And thou a natural Coward, without instinct.


I deny your Mayor: if you will deny the Sheriff, so: if not, let him enter. If
I become not a Cart as well as another man, a plague on my bringing up: I hope
I shall as soon be strangled with a Halter, as another


Go hide thee behind the Arras, the rest walk up above. Now my Masters, for
a true Face and good Conscience


Both which I have had: but their date is out, and therefore I Will hide me.


Call in the Sheriff.


Now Master Sheriff, what is your will with me?


First pardon me, my Lord. A Hue and Cry has followed certain men unto this
house


What men?


One of them is well known, my gracious Lord, a gross fat man.


As fat as Butter.


The man, I do assure you, is not here,
For I my self at this time have employed him:
And Sheriff, I will engage my word to thee,
That I will by to morrow Dinner time,
Send him to answer thee, or any man,
For any thing he shall be charged withal:
And so let me entreat you, leave the house.

I will, my Lord: there are two Gentlemen
Have in this Robbery lost three hundred Marks.

It may be so: if he have robbed these men,
He shall be answerable: and so farewell.

Good Night, my Noble Lord.


I think it is good Morrow, is it not?


Indeed, my Lord, I think it be two a Clock.


This oily Rascal is known as well as Poules: go call him forth.


Falstaff? fast asleep behind the Arras, and snorting like a Horse.


Hark, how hard he fetches breath: search his Pockets.


What have thou found?


Nothing but Papers, my Lord.


Let Us see, what be they? read them.


Item, a Capon. ii.s.ii.d.
Item, Sauce. iiii.d.
Item, Sack, two Gallons. v.s.viii.d.
Item, Anchoues and Sack after Supper. ii.s.vi.d.
Item, Bread. ob.

O monstrous, but one half pennyworth of Bread to this intolerable deal of
Sack? What there is else, keep close, we will read it at more advantage:
there let him sleep till day. I Will to the Court in the Morning: We must all to
the Wars, and thy place shall be honorable. I Will procure this fat Rogue a
Charge of Foot, and I know his death will be a Match of Twelue-score. The Money
shall be paid back again with advantage. Be with me betimes in the Morning:
and so good morrow Peto


Good morrow, good my Lord.


These promises are fair, the parties sure,
And our induction full of prosperous hope.

Lord Mortimer, and Cousin Glendower,
Will you sit down?
And Uncle Worcester; a plague upon it,
I have forgot the Map.

No, here it is:
Sit Cousin Percy, sit good Cousin Hotspurre:
For by that Name, as often as Lancaster does speak of you,
His Cheeks look pale, and with a rising sigh,
He wishes you in Heaven.

And you in Hell, as often as he hears Owen Glendower spoke of.


I cannot blame him: At my Nativity,
The front of Heaven was full of fiery shapes,
Of burning Cressets: and at my Birth,
The frame and foundation of the Earth
Shak'd like a Coward.

Why so it would have done at the same season, if your Mothers Cat had but
kitten'd, though your self had never been borne


I say the Earth did shake when I was borne.


And I say the Earth was not of my mind,
If you suppose, as fearing you, it shook.

The Heavens were all on fire, the Earth did tremble.


Oh, then the Earth shook
To see the Heavens on fire,
And not in fear of your Nativity.
Diseased Nature oftentimes breaks forth
In strange eruptions; and the teeming Earth
Is with a kind of Colic pincht and vexed,
By the imprisoning of unruly Wind
Within her Womb: which for enlargement striving,
Shakes the old Beldame Earth, and tombles down
Steeples, and mosse-growne Towers. At your Birth,
Our Grandam Earth, having this distemperature,
In passion shook.

Cousin: of many men
I do not bear these Crossings: Give me leave
To tell you once again, that at my Birth
The front of Heaven was full of fiery shapes,
The Goats ran from the Mountains, and the Herds
Were strangely clamorous to the frighted fields:
These signs have marked me extraordinary,
And all the courses of my Life do show,
I am not in the Roll of common men.
Where is the Living, clipped in with the Sea,
That chides the Banks of England, Scotland, and Wales,
Which calls me Pupil, or has read to me?
And bring him out, that is but Woman's Son,
Can trace me in the tedious ways of Art,
And hold me pace in deep experiments.

I think there is no man speaks better Welsh:
I Will to Dinner.

Peace Cousin Percy, you will make him mad.


I can call Spirits from the vastie Deep.


Why so can I, or so can any man:
But will they come, when you do call for them?

Why, I can teach thee, Cousin, to command the Devil.


And I can teach thee, Cousin, to shame the Devil,
By telling truth. Tell truth, and shame the Devil.
If thou have power to raise him, bring him hither,
And I Will be sworn, I have power to shame him hence.
Oh, while you live, tell truth, and shame the Devil.

Come, come, no more of this unprofitable Chat.


Three times has Henry Bullingbrooke made head
Against my Power: thrice from the Banks of Wye,
And sandy-bottom'd Seuerne, have I hent him
Bootlesse home, and Weather-beaten back.

Home without Boots,
And in foul Weather too,
How scapes he Agues in the Devils name?

Come, here is the Map:
Shall we divide our Right,
According to our threefold order-ta'ne?

The Archdeacon has divided it
Into three Limits, very equally:
England, from Trent, and Seuerne hitherto,
By South and East, is to my part assigned:
All Westward, Wales, beyond the Seuerne shore,
And all the fertile Land within that bound,
To Owen Glendower: And dear Couze, to you
The remnant Northward, lying off from Trent.
And our Indentures Tripartite are drawn:
Which being sealed enterchangeably,
(A Business that this Night may execute)
To morrow, Cousin Percy, you and I,
And my good Lord of Worcester, will set forth,
To meet your Father, and the Scottish Power,
As is appointed us at Shrewsbury.
My Father Glendower is not ready yet,
Nor shall we need his help these fourteen days:
Within that space, you may have drawn together
Your Tenants, Friends, and neighboring Gentlemen.

A shorter time shall send me to you, Lords:
And in my Conduct shall your Ladies come,
From whom you now must steal, and take no leave,
For there will be a World of Water shed,
Upon the parting of your Wives and you.

Me thinks my Moity, North from Burton here,
In quantity equals not one of yours:
See, how this River comes me cranking in,
And cuts me from the best of all my Land,
A huge half Moon, a monstrous Cantle out.
I Will have the Current in this place damned up,
And here the smug and Silver Trent shall run,
In a new Channel, fair and euenly:
It shall not wind with such a deep indent,
To rob me of so rich a Bottom here.

Not wind? it shall, it must, you see it does.


Yea, but mark how he bears his course,
And runs me up, with like advantage on the other side,
Gelding the opposed Continent as much,
As on the other side it takes from you.

Yea, but a little Charge will trench him here,
And on this North side win this Cape of Land,
And then he runs straight and even.

I Will have it so, a little Charge will do it.


I Will not have it altered.


Will not you?


No, nor you shall not.


Who shall say me nay?


Why, that will I.


Let me not understand you then, speak it in Welsh.


I can speak English, Lord, as well as you:
For I was trayn'd up in the English Court;
Where, being but young, I framed to the Harp
Many an English Dittie, lovely well,
And gave the Tongue a helpefull Ornament;
A Virtue that was never seen in you.

Marry, and I am glad of it with all my heart,
I had rather be a Kitten, and cry mew,
Then one of these same Meeter Ballad-mongers:
I had rather hear a Brazen Candlestick turned,
Or a dry Wheel grate on the Axle-tree,
And that would set my teeth nothing an edge,
Nothing so much, as mincing Poetry;
It Is like the forced gate of a shuffling Nagge.

Come, you shall have Trent turned.


I do not care: I Will give thrice so much Land
To any well-deseruing friend;
But in the way of Bargain, mark ye me,
I Will cavil on the ninth part of a hair.
Are the Indentures drawn? shall we be gone?

The Moon shines fair,
You may away by Night:
I Will haste the Writer; and withal,
Break with your Wives, of your departure hence:
I am afraid my Daughter will run mad,
So much she doteth on her Mortimer.

Fie, Cousin Percy, how you cross my Father.


I cannot choose: sometime he angers me,
With telling me of the Moldwarpe and the Ant,
Of the Dreamer Merlin, and his Prophecies;
And of a Dragon, and a finne-lesse Fish,
A clip-wing'd Griffin, and a moulten Raven,
A couching Lion, and a ramping Cat,
And such a deal of skimble-skamble Stuff,
As puts me from my Faith. I tell you what,
He held me last Night, at least, nine hours,
In reckning up the several Devils Names,
That were his Lacqueyes:
I cried hum, and well, go too,
But marked him not a word. O, he is as tedious
As a tired Horse, a railing Wife,
Worse then a smoakie House. I had rather live
With Cheese and Garlic in a Windmill far,
Then feed on Cates, and have him talk to me,
In any Summer House in Christendom.

In faith he was a worthy Gentleman,
Exceeding well read, and profited,
In strange Concealements:
Valiant as a Lion, and wondrous affable,
And as bountiful, as Mines of India.
Shall I tell you, Cousin,
He holds your temper in a high respect,
And curbes himself, even of his natural scope,
When you do cross his humor: 'faith he does.
I warrant you, that man is not alive,
Might so have tempted him, as you have done,
Without the taste of danger, and reproof:
But do not use it often, let me entreat you.

In faith, my Lord, you are too wilful blame,
And since your coming hither, have done enough,
To put him quite besides his patience.
You must needs learn, Lord, to amend this fault:
Though sometimes it show Greatness, Courage, Blood,
And that is the dearest grace it renders you;
Yet oftentimes it does present harsh Rage,
Defect of Manners, want of Government,
Pride, Haughtiness, Opinion, and Disdain:
The least of which, haunting a Nobleman,
Loses men's hearts, and leaves behind a stayne
Upon the beauty of all parts besides,
Beguiling them of commendation.

Well, I am schooled:
Good-manners be your speed;
Here come your Wives, and let us take our leave.

This is the deadly spite, that angers me,
My Wife can speak no English, I no Welsh.

My Daughter weeps, she will not part with you,
She Will be a Soldier too, she will to the Wars.

Good Father tell her, that she and my Aunt Percy
Shall follow in your Conduct speedily.

She is desperate here:
A peevish selfe-will'd Harlotry,
One that no persuasion can do good upon.

I understand thy Looks: that pretty Welsh
Which thou powr'st down from these swelling Heavens,
I am too perfect in: and but for shame,
In such a parley should I answer thee.

I understand thy Kisses, and thou mine,
And that is a feeling disputation:
But I will never be a Truant, Love,
Till I have learned thy Language: for thy tongue
Makes Welsh as sweet as Ditties highly penned,
Sung by a fair Queen in a Summers Bower,
With rauishing Division to her Lute.

Nay, if thou melt, then will she run mad.


O, I am Ignorance it self in this.


She bids you,
On the wanton Rushes lay you down,
And rest your gentle Head upon her Lap,
And she will sing the Song that pleases you,
And on your Eyelids Crown the God of Sleep,
Charming your blood with pleasing heaviness;
Making such difference betwixt Wake and Sleep,
As is the difference betwixt Day and Night,
The hour before the Heavenly Harneis'd Teeme
Begins his Golden Progress in the East.

With all my heart I Will sit, and hear her sing:
By that time will our Book, I think, be drawn.

Do so:
And those Musicians that shall play to you,
Hang in the Air a thousand Leagues from thence;
And straight they shall be here: sit, and attend.

Come Kate, thou art perfect in lying down:
Come, quick, quick, that I may lay my Head in thy Lap.

Go, ye giddy-Goose.


Now I perceive the Devil understands Welsh,
And it is no marvel he is so humorous:
Byrlady he is a good Musician.

Then would you be nothing but Musical,
For you are altogether governed by humors:
Lie still ye Thief, and hear the Lady sing in Welsh.

I had rather hear (Lady) my Brach howl in Irish.


Would have thy Head broken?


No.


Then be still.


Neither, it is a Woman's fault.


Now God help thee.


To the Welsh Ladies Bed.


What Is that?


Peace, she sings.


Come, I Will have your Song too.


Not mine, in good sooth.


Not yours, in good sooth?
You swear like a Comfit-makers Wife:
Not you, in good sooth; and, as true as I live;
And, as God shall mend me; and, as sure as day:
And give such Sarcenet surety for thy Oaths,
As if thou never walk'st further then Finsbury.
Swear me, Kate, like a Lady, as thou art,
A good mouth-filling Oath: and leave in sooth,
And such protest of Pepper Ginger-bread,
To Veluet-Guards, and Sunday-Citizens.
Come, sing.

I will not sing.


It Is the next way to turn Tailor, or be Redbrest teacher: and the Indentures
be drawn, I Will away within these two hours: and so come in, when ye will


Come, come, Lord Mortimer, you are as slow,
As hot Lord Percy is on fire to go.
By this our Book is drawn: we will but seal,
And then to Horse immediately.

With all my heart.


Lords, give us leave:
The Prince of Wales, and I,
Must have some private conference:
But be near at hand,
For we shall presently have need of you.
I know not whether Heaven will have it so,
For some displeasing service I have done;
That in his secret Doom, out of my Blood,
He Will breed Reuengement, and a Scourge for me:
But thou do in thy passages of Life,
Make me believe, that thou art only marked
For the hot vengeance, and the Rod of heaven
To punish my Mistreadings. Tell me else.
Could such inordinate and low desires,
Such poor, such bare, such lewd, such mean attempts,
Such barren pleasures, rude society,
As thou art matched withal, and grafted too,
Accompany the greatness of thy blood,
And hold their level with thy Princely heart?

So please your Majesty, I would I could
Quit all offenses with as clear excuse,
As well as I am doubtless I can purge
My self of many I am charged withal:
Yet such extenuation let me beg,
As in reproof of many Tales devised,
Which often the Ear of Greatness needs must hear,
By smiling Pick-thankes, and base Newes-mongers;
I may for some things true, wherein my youth
Has faulty wandered, and irregular,
Find pardon on my true submission.

Heaven pardon thee:
Yet let me wonder, Harry,
At thy affections, which do hold a Wing
Quite from the flight of all thy ancestors.
Thy place in Council thou have rudely lost,
Which by thy younger Brother is supply'de;
And art almost an alien to the hearts
Of all the Court and Princes of my blood.
The hope and expectation of thy time
Is ruined, and the Soul of every man
Prophetically do fore-thinke thy fall.
Had I so lavish of my presence been,
So common hackney'd in the eyes of men,
So stale and cheap to vulgar Company;
Opinion, that did help me to the Crown,
Had still kept loyal to possession,
And left me in reputelesse banishment,
A fellow of no mark, nor likelihood.
By being seldom seen, I could not stir,
But like a Comet, I was wondered at,
That men would tell their Children, This is he:
Others would say; Where, Which is Bullingbrooke.
And then I stole all Courtesy from Heaven,
And dressed my self in such Humility,
That I did pluck Allegiance from men's hearts,
Loud Showts and Salutations from their mouths,
Even in the presence of the Crowned King.
Thus I did keep my Person fresh and new,
My Presence like a Robe Pontifical,
Never seen, but wondered at: and so my State,
Seldom but sumptuous, showed like a Feast,
And won by rareness such Solemnity.
The skipping King he ambled up and down,
With shallow Iesters, and rash Bauin Wits,
Soon kindled, and soon burnt, carded his State,
Mingled his Royalty with Carping Fools,
Had his great Name profaned with their Scorns,
And gave his Countenance, against his Name,
To laugh at gybing Boys, and stand the push
Of every Beardlesse vain Comparatiue;
Grew a Companion to the common Streets,
Enfeoff'd himself to Popularitie:
That being daily swallowed by men's Eyes,
They surfeted with Honey, and began to loathe
The taste of Sweetness, whereof a little
More then a little, is by much too much.
So when he had occasion to be seen,
He was but as the Cuckoo is in June,
Heard, not regarded: seen but with such Eyes,
As sick and blunted with Community,
Afford no extraordinary Gaze,
Such as is bent on Sunne-like Majesty,
When it shines seldom in admiring Eyes:
But rather drowz'd, and hung their eyelids down,
Slept in his Face, and rendered such aspect
As Cloudie men use to do to their adversaries,
Being with his presence glutted, gorged, and full.
And in that very Line, Harry, stand thou:
For thou have lost thy Princely Privilege,
With vile participation. Not an Eye
But is a weary of thy common sight,
Save mine, which has desired to see thee more:
Which now does that I would not have it do,
Make blind it self with foolish tenderness.

I shall hereafter, my thrice gracious Lord,
Be more my self.

For all the World,
As thou art to this hour, was Richard then,
When I from France set foot at Rauenspurgh;
And even as I was then, is Percy now:
Now by my Scepter, and my Soul to boot,
He has more worthy interest to the State
Then thou, the shadow of Succession;
For of no Right, nor color like to Right.
He does fill fields with Harneis in the Realm,
Turns head against the Lions armed Jaws;
And being no more in debt to years, then thou,
Leads ancient Lords, and reverent Bishops on
To bloody Battles, and to brusing Arms.
What neuer-dying Honor has he got,
Against renowned Douglas? whose high Deeds,
Whose hot Incursions, and great Name in Arms,
Holds from all Soldiers chief Maioritie,
And Military Title Capital.
Through all the Kingdoms that acknowledge Christ,
Thrice has the Hotspur Mars, in swathing Clothes,
This Infant Warrior, in his Enterprises,
Discomfited great Douglas, taken him once,
Enlarged him, and made a friend of him,
To fill the mouth of deep Defiance up,
And shake the peace and safety of our Throne.
And what say you to this? Percy, Northumberland,
The Archbishops Grace of York, Douglas, Mortimer,
Capitulate against us, and are up.
But wherefore do I tell these News to thee?
Why, Harry, do I tell thee of my Foes,
Which art my neer'st and dearest Enemy?
Thou, that art like enough, through vassal Fear,
Base Inclination, and the start of Spleen,
To fight against me under Percies pay,
To dog his heels, and curtsie at his frowns,
To show how much thou art degenerate.

Do not think so, you shall not find it so:
And Heaven forgive them, that so much have swayed
Your Majesty's good thoughts away from me:
I will redeem all this on Percies head,
And in the closing of some glorious day,
Be bold to tell you*that I am your Son,
When I will wear a Garment all of Blood,
And stain my favors in a bloody Mask:
Which washed away, shall scowre my shame with it.
And that shall be the day, when ere it lights,
That this same Child of Honor and Renown.
This gallant Hotspur, this all-praysed Knight,
And your vnthought-of Harry chance to meet:
For every Honor fitting on his Helm,
Would they were multitudes, and on my head
My shames redoubled. For the time will come,
That I shall make this Northern Youth exchange
His glorious Deeds for my Indignities:
Percy is but my Factor, good my Lord,
To engrosse up glorious Deeds on my behalf:
And I will call him to so strict account,
That he shall render every Glory up,
Yea, even the sleightest worship of his time,
Or I will tear the Reckoning from his Heart.
This, in the Name of Heaven, I promise here:
The which, if I perform, and do survive,
I do beseech your Majesty, may salve
The long-growne Wounds of my intemperature:
If not, the end of Life cancells all Bands,
And I will dye a hundred thousand Deaths,
Ere break the smallest parcel of this Vow.

A hundred thousand Rebels dye in this:
Thou shall have Charge, and sovereign trust herein.
How now good Blunt? thy Looks are full of speed.

So has the Business that I come to speak of.
Lord Mortimer of Scotland has sent word,
That Douglas and the English Rebels met
The eleventh of this month, at Shrewsbury:
A mighty and a fearful Head they are,
(If Promises be kept on every hand)
As ever offered foul play in a State.

The Earl of Westmerland set forth to day:
With him my son, Lord John of Lancaster,
For this advertisement is five days old.
On Wednesday next, Harry thou shall set forward:
On Thursday, we our selves will march.
Our meeting is Bridgenorth: and Harry, you shall march
Through Glocestershire: by which account,
Our Business valued some twelve days hence,
Our general Forces at Bridgenorth shall meet.
Our Hands are full of Business: let us away,
Advantage feeds him fat, while men delay.

Bardolph, am I not fallen away vilely, since this last action? do I not bate?
do I not dwindle? Why my skin hangs about me like an old Ladies loose
Gown: I am withered like an old Apple John. Well, I Will repent, and that
suddenly, while I am in some li^ing: I shall be out of heart shortly, and then
I shall have no strength to repent. And I have not forgotten what the inside
of a Church is made of I am a Pepper Corn, a Brewers Horse, the inside of a
Church. Company, villainous Company has been the spoil of me


Sir John, you are so fretfull, you cannot live long.


Why there is it: Come, sing me a bawdy Song, make me merry: I was as
virtuously given, as a Gentleman need to be; virtuous enough, swore little,
dic'd not above seven times a week, went to a Bawdy House not above once in a
quarter of an hour, paid Money that I borrowed, three or four times; lived
well, and in good compass: and now I live out of all order, out of compass


Why, you are so fat, Sir John, that you must ^edes be out of all compass;
out of all reasonable compass Sir John


Do thou amend thy Face, and I Will amend thy Life: Thou art our Admiral, thou
bear the Lantern in the Poope, but it is in the Nose of thee; thou art the
Knight of the burning Lamp


Why, Sir John, my Face does you no harm.


No, I Will be sworn: I make as good use of it, as many a man does of a
Deaths-Head, or a Memento Mori. I never see thy Face, but I think upon Hell
fire, and Dives that lived in Purple; for there he is in his Robes burning,
burning. If thou were any way given to virtue, I would swear by thy Face; my
Oath should be, By this Fire: But thou art altogether given over; and were
indeed, but for the Light in thy Face, the Sun of utter Darkness. When
thou ra^'st up Gads-Hill in the Night, to catch my Horse* if I did not think
that thou had been an Ignis fatnus, or a Ball of Wildfire, there is no
Purchase in Money. O, thou art a perpetual Triumph, an everlasting
Bone-fire-Light: thou have saved me a thousand Marks in Linkes and Torches*
walking with thee in the Night betwixt Tavern and Tavern: But the Sack that
thou have drunk me, would have bought me Lights as good cheap, as the dearest
Chandlers in Europe. I have maintained that Salamander of yours with fire, any
time this two and thirty years, Heaven reward me for it


I would my Face were in your Belly.


So should I be sure to be heart-burn'd.

How now, Dame Partlet the Hen, have you inquired yet who picked my Pocket?


Why Sir John, what do you think, Sir John? do you think I keep Thieves in
my House? I have searched, I have enquired, so haz my Husband, Man by Man, Boy
by Boy, Servant by Servant: the tight of a hair was never lost in my house
before


Ye lie Hostess: Bardolph was shau'd, and lost many a hair; and I Will be sworn
my Pocket was picked: go to, you are a Woman, go


Who I? I defy thee: I was never called so in mine own house before.


Go to, I know you well enough.


No, Sir John, you do not know me, Sir John: I know you, Sir John: you owe me
Money, Sir John, and now you pick a quarrel, to beguile me of it: I bought
you a dozen of Shirts to your Back


Doulas* filthy Doulas: I have given them away to Bakers Wives, and they have
made Boulters of them


Now as I am a true Woman, Holland of eight shillings an Ell: You owe Money
here besides, Sir John, for your Diet, and by-Drinkings, and Money lent you,
four and twenty pounds


He had his part of it, let him pay.


He? alas he is poor, he has nothing.


How? Poor? Look upon his Face: What call you Rich? Let them coin his Nose,
let them coin his Cheeks, I Will not pay a Denier. What, will you make a Yo^ker
of me? Shall I not take mine ease in mine Inn, but I shall have my Pocket
picked? I have lost a Seale-Ring of my Grandfathers, worth forty Mark


I have heard the Prince tell him, I know not how often that that Ring was Copper.


How? the Prince is a Jack, a Sneake-Cuppe: and if he were here, I would
cudgel him like a Dog, if he would say so


How now Lad? is the Wind in that Door?
Must we all march?

Yea, two and two, Newgate fashion.


My Lord, I pray you hear me.


What say thou, Mistress Quickly? How does thy Husband? I love him well,
he is an honest man


Good, my Lord, hear me.


Prithee let her alone, and lift to me.


What say thou, Jack?


The other Night I fell asleep here behind the Arras, and had my Pocket
picked: this House is turned Bawdy House, they pick Pockets


What did thou lose, Jack?


Will thou believe me, Hal? Three or four Bonds of forty pound apeece, and a
Seale-Ring of my Grandfathers


A Trifle, some eight-penny matter.


So I told him, my Lord; and I said, I heard your Grace say so: and (my Lord)
he speaks most vilely of you, like a foul-mouthed man as he is, and said,
he would cudgel you


What he did not?


There Is neither Faith, Truth, nor Woman-hood in me else.


There Is no more faith in thee then a stu'de Prune; nor no more truth in thee,
then in a drawn Fox: and for Wooman-hood, Maid-marian may be the Deputies wife
of the Ward to thee. Go you nothing: go


Say, what thing? what thing?


What thing? why a thing to thank heaven on.


I am no thing to thank heaven on, I would thou should know it: I am an
honest man's wife: and setting thy Knighthood aside, thou art a knave to call me
so


Setting thy woman-hood aside, thou art a beast to say otherwise.


Say, what beast, thou knave thou?


What beast? Why an Otter.


An Otter, sir John? Why an Otter?


Why? She Is neither fish nor flesh; a man knows not where to have her.


Thou art unjust man in saying so; thou, or any man knows where to have me,
thou knave thou


Thou say true Hostess, and he slanders thee most grossly.


So he does you, my Lord, and said this other day, You ought him a thousand
pound


Sirrah, do I owe you a thousand pound?


A thousand pound Hal? A Million. Thy love is worth a Million: thou ow'st me
thy love


Nay my Lord, he called you Jack, and said he would cudgel you.


Did I, Bardolph?


Indeed Sir John, you said so.


Yea, if he said my Ring was Copper.


I say it is Copper. Dare thou be as good as thy word now?


Why Hal? thou know, as thou art but a man, I dare: but, as thou art a
Prince, I fear thee, as I fear the roaring of the Lions Whelpe


And why not as the Lion?


The King himself is to be feared as the Lion: Do thou think I Will fear
thee, as I fear thy Father? nay if I do, let my Girdle break


O, if it should* how would thy guts fall about thy knees. But sir: There Is
no room for Faith, Truth, nor Honesty, in this bosom of thine: it is all
filled up with Guts and Midriffe. Charge an honest Woman with picking thy
pocket? Why thou horson impudent imbost Rascal, if there were any thing in thy
Pocket but Tavern Recknings, Memorandums of Bawdie-houses, and one poor
peny-worth of Sugar-candie to make thee long-winded: if thy pocket were
enriched with any other injuries but these, I am a Villain: And yet you will
stand to it, you will not Pocket up wrong. Art thou not ashamed


Do thou hear Hal? Thou know in the state of Innocence, Adam fell: and
what should poor Jack Falstaff do, in the days of Villainy? Thou see, I
have more flesh then another man, and therefore more frailty. You confess then
you picked my Pocket


It appears so by the Story.


Hostess, I forgive thee:
Go make ready Breakfast, love thy Husband,
Look to thy Servants, and cherish thy Guests:
Thou shall find me tractable to any honest reason:
Thou see, I am pacified still.
Nay, I prithee be gone.
Now Hal, to the news at Court for the Robbery, Lad?
How is that answered?

O my sweet Beef:
I must still be good Angel to thee.
The Money is paid back again.

O, I do not like that paying back, it is a double Labor.


I am good Friends with my Father, and may do anything.


Rob me the Exchequer the first thing thou do, and do it with vnwash'd hands
too


Do my Lord.


I have procured thee Jack, a Charge of Foot.


I would it had been of Horse. Where shall I find one that can steal well? O,
for a fine thief of two and twenty, or thereabout: I am heynously unprovided.
Well God be thanked for these Rebels, they offend none but the Virtuous. I laud
them, I praise them


Bardolph.


My Lord.


Go bear this Letter to Lord John of Lancaster
To my Brother John. This to my Lord of Westmerland,
Go Peto, to horse: for thou, and I,
Have thirty miles to ride yet ere dinner time.
Jack, meet me to morrow in the Temple Hall
At two a clock in the afternoon,
There shall thou know thy Charge, and there receive
Money and Order for their Furniture.
The Land is burning, Percie stands on hye,
And either they, or we must lower lie.

Rare words! brave world.
Hostess, my breakfast, come:
Oh, I could wish this Tavern were my drum.

Well said, my Noble Scot, if speaking truth
In this fine Age, were not thought flattery,
Such attribution should the Douglas have,
As not a Soldier of this seasons stamp,
Should go so general current through the world.
By heaven I cannot flatter: I defy
The Tongues of Soothers. But a Brauer place
In my hearts love, has no man then your Self.
Nay, task me to my word: approve me Lord.

Thou art the King of Honor:
No man so potent breathes upon the ground,
But I will Beard him.

Do so, and it is well. What Letters have there?
I can but thank you.

These Letters come from your Father.


Letters from him?
Why comes he not himself?

He cannot come, my Lord,
He is grievous sick.

How? haz he the leisure to be sick now,
In such a iustling time? Who leads his power?
Under whose Government come they along?

His Letters bears his mind, not I his mind.


I prithee tell me, does he keep his Bed?


He did, my Lord, four days ere I set forth:
And at the time of my departure thence,
He was much feared by his Physician.

I would the state of time had first been whole,
Ere he by sickness had been visited:
His health was never better worth then now.

Sick now? droope now? this sickness does infect
The very Lifeblood of our Enterprise,
It Is catching hither, even to our Camp.
He writes me here, that inward sickness,
And that his friends by deputation
Could not so soon be drawn: nor did he think it meet,
To lay so dangerous and dear a trust
On any Soul removed, but on his own.
Yet does he give us bold advertisement,
That with our small conjunction we should on,
To see how Fortune is disposed to us:
For, as he writes, there is no quailing now,
Because the King is certainly possessed
Of all our purposes. What say you to it?

Your Fathers sickness is a mayme to us.


A perilous Gash, a very Limme lopt off:
And yet, in faith, it is not his present want
Seems more then we shall find it.
Were it good* to set the exact wealth of all our states
All at one Cast? To set so rich a main
On the nice hazard of one doubtful hour,
It were not good: for therein should we read
The very Bottom, and the Soul of Hope,
The very List, the very utmost Bound
Of all our fortunes.

Faith, and so we should,
Where now remains a sweet reuersion.
We may boldly spend, upon the hope
Of what is to come in:
A comfort of retyrement lives in this.

A Randeuous, a Home to fly unto,
If that the Devil and Mischance look bigg^
Upon the Maydenhead of our Affairs.

But yet I would your Father had been here:
The Quality and Heir of our Attempt
Brooks no division: It will be thought
By some, that know not why he is away,
That wisdom, loyalty, and mere dislike
Of our proceedings, kept the Earl from hence.
And think, how such an apprehension
May turn the tide of fearful Faction,
And breed a kind of question in our cause:
For well you know, we of the offering side,
Must keep aloof from strict arbitrament,
And stop all sight-holes, every loope, from whence
The eye of reason may pry in upon us:
This absence of your Father draws a Curtain,
That shows the ignorant a kind of fear,
Before not dreamt of.

You strain too far.
I rather of his absence make this use:
It lends a Luster, and more great Opinion,
A larger Dare to your great Enterprise,
Then if the Earl were here: for men must think,
If we without his help, can make a Head
To push against the Kingdom; with his help,
We shall o're-turne it topsie-turuy down:
Yet all goes well, yet all out joints are whole.

As heart can think:
There is not such a word spoke of in Scotland,
At this Dream of Fear.

My Cousin Vernon, welcome by my Soul.


Pray God my news be worth a welcome, Lord.
The Earl of Westmerland, seven thousand strong,
Is marching hither-wards, with Prince John.

No harm: what more?


And further, I have learned,
The King himself in person has set forth,
Or hither-wards intended speedily,
With strong and mighty preparation.

He shall be welcome too.
Where is his Son,
The nimble-footed Mad-Cap, Prince of Wales,
And his Cumrades, that daft the World aside,
And bid it pass?

All furnished, all in Arms,
All plumed like Estridges, that with the Wind
Bayted like Eagles, having lately bathed,
Glittering in Golden Coats, like Images,
As full of spirit as the Month of May,
And gorgeous as the Sun at Mid-summer,
Wanton as youthful Goats, wild as young Bulls.
I saw young Harry with his Beuer on,
His Cushes on his thighs, gallantly armed,
Rise from the ground like feathered Mercury.
And vaulted with such ease into his Seat,
As if an Angel dropped down from the Clouds,
To turn and wind a fiery Pegasus,
And witch the World with Noble Horsemanship.

No more, no more,
Worse men the Sun in March:
This praise does nourish Agues: let them come.
They come like Sacrifices in their trim,
And to the fire-ey'd Maid of smoakie War,
All hot, and bleeding, will we offer them:
The mayled Mars shall on his Altar sit
Up to the ears i^ blood. I am on fire,
To hear this rich reprizall is so nigh,
And yet not ours. Come, let me take my Horse,
Who is to bear me like a Thunderbolt,
Against the bosom of the Prince of Wales.
Harry to Harry, shall not Horse to Horse
Meet, and never part, till one drop down a Coarse?
Oh, that Glendower were come.

There is more news:
I learned in Worcester, as I rode along,
He cannot draw his Power this fourteen days.

That Is the worst Tidings that I hear of yet.


I by my faith, that bears a frosty sound.


What may the Kings whole Battle reach unto?


To thirty thousand.


Forty let it be,
My Father and Glendower being both away,
The powers of us, may serve so great a day.
Come, let us take a muster speedily:
Doomesday is near; dye all, dye merrily.

Talk not of dying. I am out of fear
Of death, or deaths hand, for this one half year.

Bardolph, get thee before to Couentry, fill me a Bottle of Sack, our Soldiers
shall march through: we will to Sutton-cop-hill to Night


Will you give me Money, Captain?


Lay out, lay out.


This Bottle makes an Angel.


And if it do, take it for thy labor: and if it make twenty, take them all,
He answer the Coynage. Bid my Lieutenant Peto meet me at the Towns end


I will Captain: farewell.


If I be not ashamed of my Soldiers, I am a sowc't-Gurnet: I have mis-vs'd the
Kings Press damnably. I have got, in exchange of a hundred and fifty
Soldiers, three hundred and odd Pounds. I press me none but good
House-holders, Yeomens Sons: enquire me out contracted Batchelers, such as
had been asked twice on the Banes: such a Commodity of warm slaves, as had
as lieue hear the Devil, as a Drum; such as fear the report of a Caliuer,
worse then a struck-Foole, or a hurt wilde-Ducke, I pressed me none but such
Tostes and Butter, with Hearts in their Bellyes no bigger then Pinnes heads,
and they have bought out their services: And now, my whole Charge consists of
Ancients, Corporals, Lieutenants, Gentlemen of Companies, Slaves as ragged as
Lazarus in the painted Cloth, where the Gluttons Dogs licked his Sores; and
such, as indeed were never Soldiers, but dis-carded unjust Seruingmen, younger
Sons to younger Brothers, revolted Tapsters and Ostlers, Trade-falne, the
Cankers of a calm World, and long Peace, ten times more dishonorable
ragged, then an old-fac'd Ancient; and such have I to fill up the rooms of
them that have bought out their services: that you would think, that I had a
hundred and fifty tottered Prodigalls, lately come from Swine-keeping, from
eating Draffe and Husks. A mad fellow met me on the way, and told me, I had
unloaded all the Gibbets, and pressed the dead bodies. No eye has seen such
skar-Crowes: I Will not march through Couentry with them, that is flat. Nay, and
the Villains march wide betwixt the Legs, as if they had Gyues on; for
indeed, I had the most of them out of Prison. There Is not a Shirt and a half
in all my Company: and the half Shirt is two Napkins tackt together, and
thrown over the shoulders like a Heralds Coat, without sleeves: and the Shirt,
to say the truth, stolen from my Host of S. Albones, or the Red-Nose
Inne-keeper of Dauintry. But that is all one, they will find Linen enough on
every Hedge


How now blown Jack? how now Quilt?


What Hal? How now mad Wag, what a Devil do thou in Warwickshire? My good
Lord of Westmerland, I cry you mercy, I thought your Honor had already been
at Shrewsbury


'Faith, Sir John, it is more then time that I were there, and you too: but my
Powers are there already. The King, I can tell you, looks for us all: we must
away all to Night


Tut, never fear me, I am as vigilant as a Cat, to steal Cream.


I think to steal Cream indeed, for thy theft has already made thee
Butter: but tell me, Jack, whose fellows are these that come after


Mine, Hal, mine.


I did never see such pitiful Rascals.


Tut, tut, good enough to toss: food for Powder, food for Powder: they will
fill a Pit, as well as better: tush man, mortal men, mortal men


I, but Sir John, me thinks they are exceeding poor and bare, too beggarly.


Faith, for their poverty, I know not where they had that; and for their
bareness, I am sure they never learned that of me


No, I Will be sworn, unless you call three fingers on the Ribs bare. But
sir, make haste, Percy is already in the field


What, is the King encamped?


He is, Sir John, I fear we shall stay too long.


Well, to the latter end of a Fray, and the beginning of a Feast, fits a dull
fighter, and a keen Guest


We Will fight with him to Night.


It may not be.


You give him then advantage.


Not a whit.


Why say you so? looks he not for supply?


So do we.


His is certain, ours is doubtful.


Good Cousin be advised, stir not to night.


Do not, my Lord.


You do not counsel well:
You speak it out of fear, and cold heart.

Do me no slander, Douglas: by my Life,
And I dare well maintain it with my Life,
If well-respected Honor bid me on,
I hold as little counsel with weak fear,
As you, my Lord, or any Scot that this day lives.
Let it be seen to morrow in the Battle,
Which of us fears.

Yea, or to night.


Content.


To night, say I.


Come, come, it may not be.
I wonder much, being me^ of such great leading as you are
That you foresee not what impediments
Drag back our expedition: certain Horse
Of my Cousin Vernons are not yet come up,
Your Uncle Worcesters Horse came but to day,
And now their pride and metal is asleep,
Their courage with hard labor tame and dull,
That not a Horse is half the half of himself.

So are the Horses of the Enemy
In general journey bated, and brought low:
The better part of ours are full of rest.

The number of the King exceeds ours:
For Gods sake, Cousin, stay till all come in.

I come with gracious offers from the King,
If you vouchsafe me hearing, and respect.

Welcome, Sir Walter Blunt:
And would to God you were of our determination.
Some of us love you well: and even those some
Envy your great deseruings, and good name,
Because you are not of our quality,
But stand against us like an Enemy.

And Heaven defend, but still I should stand so,
So long as out of Limit, and true Rule,
You stand against anointed Majesty.
But to my Charge.
The King has sent to know
The nature of your Griefs, and whereupon
You conjure from the Breast of Civil Peace,
Such bold Hostility, teaching his dutious Land
Audacious Cruelty. If that the King
Have any way your good Deserts forgot,
Which he confesses to be manifold,
He bids you name your Griefs, and with all speed
You shall have your desires, with interest;
And Pardon absolute for your self, and these,
Herein misled, by your suggestion.

The King is kind:
And well we know, the King
Knows at what time to promise, when to pay.
My Father, my Uncle, and my self,
Did give him that same Royalty he wears:
And when he was not six and twenty strong,
Sick in the Worlds regard, wretched, and low,
A poor vnminded Outlaw, sneaking home,
My Father gave him welcome to the shore:
And when he heard him swear, and vow to God,
He came but to be Duke of Lancaster,
To sue his Liuerie, and beg his Peace,
With tears of Innocence, and terms of Zeal;
My Father, in kind heart and pity moved,
Swore him assistance, and performed it too.
Now, when the Lords and Barons of the Realm
Perceived Northumberland did lean to him,
The more and less came in with Cap and Knee,
Met him in Boroughs, Cities, Villages,
Attended him on Bridges, stood in Lanes,
Laid Gifts before him, proffered him their Oaths,
Gave him their Heirs, as Pages followed him,
Even at the heels, in golden multitudes,
He presently, as Greatness knows it self,
Steps me a little higher then his Vow
Made to my Father, while his blood was poor,
Upon the naked shore at Rauenspurgh:
And now (forsooth) takes on him to reform
Some certain Edicts, and some strait Decrees,
That lay too heavy on the Commonwealth;
Cries out upon abuses, seems to weep
Over his Countries Wrongs: and by this Face,
This seeming Brow of Justice, did he win
The hearts of all that he did angle for.
Proceeded further, cut me off the Heads
Of all the Favorites, that the absent King
In deputation left behind him here,
When he was personal in the Irish War.

Tut, I came not to hear this.


Then to the point.
In short time after, he deposed the King.
Soon after that, deprived him of his Life:
And in the neck of that, task't the whole State.
To make that worse, suffered his Kinsman March,
Who is, if every Owner were placed,
Indeed his King, to be engaged in Wales,
There, without Ransom, to lie forfeited:
Disgraced me in my happy Victories,
Sought to entrap me by intelligence,
Rated my Uncle from the Councell-Boord,
In rage dismissed my Father from the Court,
Broke Oath on Oath, committed Wrong on Wrong,
And in conclusion, drove us to seek out
This Head of safety; and withal, to pry
Into his Title: the which we find
Too indirect, for long continuance.

Shall I return this answer to the King?


Not so, Sir Walter.
We Will withdraw a while:
Go to the King, and let there be impawn'd
Some surety for a safe return again,
And in the Morning early shall my Uncle
Bring him our purpose: and so farewell.

I would you would accept of Grace and Love.


And't may be, so we shall.


Pray Heaven you do.


Hie, good Sir Michell, bear this sealed Brief
With winged haste to the Lord Marshall,
This to my Cousin Scroope, and all the rest
To whom they are directed.
If you knew how much they do Import.
You would make haste.

My good Lord, I guess their tenor.


Like enough you do.
To morrow, good Sir Michell, is a day,
Wherein the fortune of ten thousand men
Must bide the touch. For Sir, at Shrewsbury,
As I am truly given to understand,
The King, with mighty and quick-raysed Power,
Meets with Lord Harry: and I fear, Sir Michell,
What with the sickness of Northumberland,
Whose Power was in the first proportion;
And what with Owen Glendowers absence thence,
Who with them was rated firmly too,
And comes not in, ouer-rul'd by Prophecies,
I fear the Power of Percy is too weak,
To wage an instant trial with the King.

Why, my good Lord, you need not fear,
There is Douglas, and Lord Mortimer.

No, Mortimer is not there.


But there is Mordake, Vernon, Lord Harry Percy,
And there is my Lord of Worcester,
And a Head of gallant Warriors,
Noble Gentlemen.

And so there is, but yet the King has drawn
The special head of all the Land together:
The Prince of Wales, Lord John of Lancaster,
The Noble Westmerland, and warlike Blunt;
And many more Corriuals, and dear men
Of estimation, and command in Arms.

Doubt not my Lord, he shall be well opposed


I hope no less? Yet needful it is to fear,
And to prevent the worst, Sir Michell speed;
For if Lord Percy thrive not, ere the King
Dismiss his power, he means to visit us:
For he has heard of our Confederacy,
And, it is but Wisdom to make strong against him:
Therefore make have, I must go write again
To other Friends: and so farewell, Sir Michell.

How bloodily the Sun begins to peer
Above you busky hill: the day looks pale
At his distemperature.

The Southern wind
Does play the Trumpet to his purposes,
And by his hollow whistling in the Leaves,
Fortels a Tempest, and a blustering day.

Then with the losers let it sympathize,
For nothing can seem foul to those that win.

How now my Lord of Worster? It Is not well
That you and I should meet upon such terms,
As now we meet. You have deceived our trust,
And made us doffe our easy Robes of Peace,
To crush our old limbs in ungentle Steel:
This is not well, my Lord, this is not well.
What say you to it? Will you again unknit
This churlish knot of all-abhorred War?
And move in that obedient Orb again,
Where you did give a fair and natural light,
And be no more an exhall'd Meteor,
A prodigy of Fear, and a Portent
Of broached Mischief, to the unborn Times?

Hear me, my Liege:
For mine own part, I could be well content
To entertain the Lagge-end of my life
With quiet hours: For I do protest,
I have not sought the day of this dislike.

You have not sought it: how comes it then?


Rebellion lay in his way, and he found it.


Peace, Chewet, peace.


It pleased your Majesty, to turn your looks
Of Favor, from my Self, and all our House;
And yet I must remember you my Lord,
We were the first, and dearest of your Friends:
For you, my staff of Office did I break
In Richards time, and poasted day and night
To meet you on the way, and kiss your hand,
When yet you were in place, and in account
Nothing so strong and fortunate, as I;
It was my Self, my Brother, and his Son,
That brought you home, and boldly did out-dare
The danger of the time. You swore to us,
And you did swear that Oath at Doncaster,
That you did nothing of purpose against the State,
Nor claim no further, then your new-falne right,
The seat of Gaunt, Dukedom of Lancaster,
To this, we swear our aid: But in short space,
It rained down Fortune showring on your head,
And such a flood of Greatness fell on you,
What with our help, what with the absent King,
What with the injuries of wanton time,
The seeming sufferances that you had borne,
And the contrarious Winds that held the King
So long in the unlucky Irish Wars,
That all in England did repute him dead:
And from this swarm of fair advantages,
You took occasion to be quickly wooed,
To gripe the general sway into your hand,
Forgot your Oath to us at Doncaster,
And being fed by us, you used us so,
As that ungentle gull the Cuckowes Bird,
Uses the Sparrow, did oppress our Nest,
Grew by our Feeding, to so great a bulk,
That even our Love durst not come near your sight
For fear of swallowing: But with nimble wing
We were enforced for safety sake, to fly
Out of your sight, and raise this present Head,
Whereby we stand opposed by such means
As you your self, have forged against your self,
By unkind usage, dangerous countenance,
And violation of all faith and troth
Sworn to us in younger enterprise.

These things indeed you have articulated,
Proclaimed at Market Crosses, read in Churches,
To face the Garment of Rebellion
With some fine color, that may please the eye
Of fickle Changelings, and poor Discontents,
Which gape, and rub the Elbow at the news
Of hurly burly Innovation:
And never yet did Insurrection want
Such watercolors, to impaint his cause:
Nor moody Beggars, staruing for a time
Of pell-mell havoc, and confusion.

In both our Armies, there is many a soul
Shall pay full dearly for this encounter,
If once they join in trial. Tell your Nephew,
The Prince of Wales does join with all the world
In praise of Henry Percie: By my Hopes,
This present enterprise set off his head,
I do not think a brauer Gentleman,
More active, valiant, or more valiant young,
More daring, or more bold, is now alive,
To grace this latter Age with Noble deeds.
For my part, I may speak it to my shame,
I have a Truant been to Chiualry,
And so I hear, he does account me too:
Yet this before my Fathers Majesty,
I am content that he shall take the odds
Of his great name and estimation,
And will, to save the blood on either side,
Try fortune with him, in a Single Fight.

And Prince of Wales, so dare we venture thee,
Albeit, considerations infinite
Do make against it: No good Worster, no,
We love our people well; even those we love
That are ^sled upon your Cousins part:
And will they take the offer of our Grace:
Both he, and they, and you; yea, every man
Shall be my Friend again, and I Will be his.
So tell your Cousin, and bring me word,
What he will do. But if he will not yield,
Rebuke and dread correction wait on us,
And they shall do their Office. So be gone,
We will not now be troubled with reply,
We offer fair, take it advisedly.

It will not be accepted, on my life,
The Douglas and the Hotspurre both together,
Are confident against the world in Arms.

Hence therefore, every Leader to his charge,
For on their answer will we set on them;
And God befriend us, as our cause is just.

Hal, if thou see me down in the battle,
And bestride me, so; it is a point of friendship.

Nothing but a Colossus can do thee that friendship
Say thy prayers, and farewell.

I would it were bed time Hal, and all well.


Why, thou ow'st heaven a death.


It Is not due yet: I would be loath to pay him before his day. What need I
be so forward with him, that call's not on me? Well, it is no matter, Honor
pricks me on. But how if Honor prick me off when I come on? How then? Can
Honor set too a leg? No: or an arm? No: Or take away the grief of a wound?
No. Honor has no skill in Surgerie, then? No. What is Honor? A word. What is
that word Honor? Air: A trim reckoning. Who has it? He that died a
Wednesday. Does he feel it? No. Does he hear it? No. Is it insensible then?
yea, to the dead. But will it not live with the living? No. Why? Detraction will
not suffer it, therefore I Will none of it. Honor is a mere Scutcheon, and so
ends my Catechism


O no, my Nephew must not know, Sir Richard,
The liberal kind offer of the King.

'Twere best he did.


Then we are all undone.
It is not possible, it cannot be,
The King would keep his word in loving us,
He will suspect us still, and find a time
To punish this offense in others faults:
Supposition, all our lives, shall be stuck full of eyes;
For Treason is but trusted like the Fox,
Who never so tame, so cherisht, and locked up,
Will have a wild trick of his Ancestors:
Look how he can, or sad or merrily,
Interpretation will misquote our looks,
And we shall feed like Oxen at a stall,
The better cherisht, still the nearer death.
My Nephews trespass may be well forgot,
It has the excuse of youth, and heat of blood,
And an adopted name of Privilege,
A haire-brain'd Hotspurre, governed by a Spleen:
All his offenses live upon my head,
And on his Fathers. We did train him on,
And his corruption being taken from us,
We as the Spring of all, shall pay for all:
Therefore good Cousin, let not Harry know
In any case, the offer of the King.

Deliver what you will, I Will say it is so.
Here comes your Cousin.

My Uncle is returned,
Deliver up my Lord of Westmerland.
Uncle, what new-?

The King will bid you battle presently.


Defy him by the Lord of Westmerland.


Lord Douglas: Go you and tell him so.


Marry and shall, and very willingly.


There is no seeming mercy in the King.


Did you beg any? God forbid.


I told him gently of our greeuances,
Of his Oath-breaking: which he mended thus,
By now forswearing that he is forsworn,
He calls us Rebels, Traitors, and will scourge
With haughty arms, this hateful name in us.

Arm Gentlemen, to Arms, for I have thrown
A brave defiance in King Henry's teeth:
And Westmerland that was engaged did bear it,
Which cannot choose but bring him quickly on.

The Prince of Wales stepped forth before the king,
And Nephew, challenged you to single fight.

O, would the quarrel lay upon our heads,
And that no man might draw short breath to day,
But I and Harry Monmouth. Tell me, tell me,
How showed his Talking? Seemed it in contempt?

No, by my Soul: I never in my life
Did hear a Challenge urged more modestly,
Unless a Brother should a Brother dare
To gentle exercise, and proof of Arms.
He gave you all the Duties of a Man,
Trimmed up your praises with a Princely tongue,
Spoke your deseruings like a Chronicle,
Making you ever better then his praise,
By still dispraising praise, valew'd with you:
And which became him like a Prince indeed,
He made a blushing citall of himself,
And chid his Trewant youth with such a Grace,
As if he mastred there a double spirit
Of teaching, and of learning instantly:
There did he pause. But let me tell the World,
If he out-liue the envy of this day,
England did never owe so sweet a hope,
So much misconstrued in his Wantonness.

Cousin, I think thou art enamored
On his Follies: never did I hear
Of any Prince so wild at Liberty.
But be he as he will, yet once ere night,
I will embrace him with a Soldiers arm,
That he shall shrink under my courtesy.
Arm, arm with speed. And Fellow's, Soldiers, Friends,
Better consider what you have to do,
That I that have not well the gift of Tongue,
Can lift your blood up with persuasion.

My Lord, here are Letters for you.


I cannot read them now.
O Gentlemen, the time of life is short;
To spend that shortness basely, were too long.
If life did ride upon a Dials point,
Still ending at the arrival of an hour,
And if we live, we live to tread on Kings:
If dye; brave death, when Princes dye with us.
Now for our Consciences, the Arms is fair,
When the intent for bearing them is just.

My Lord prepare, the King comes on apace.


I thank him, that he cuts me from my tale:
For I profess not talking: Only this,
Let each man do his best. And here I draw a Sword,
Whose worthy temper I intend to stain
With the best blood that I can meet withal,
In the adventure of this perilous day.
Now Esperance Percy, and set on:
Sound all the lofty Instruments of War,
And by that Music, let us all embrace:
For heaven to earth, some of us never shall,
A second time do such a courtesy.

What is thy name, that in battle thus you crossest me?
What honor do thou seek upon my head?

Know then my name is Douglas,
And I do haunt thee in the battle thus,
Because some tell me, that thou art a King.

They tell thee true.


The Lord of Stafford dear to day has bought
Thy likeness: for insted of thee King Harry,
This Sword has ended him, so shall it thee,
Unless thou yield thee as a Prisoner.

I was not borne to yield, thou haughty Scot,
And thou shall find a King that will revenge
Lords Staffords death.

O Douglas, had thou fought at Holmedon thus I never had triumphed over a
Scot


All Is done, all is won, here breathles lies the king


Where?


Here.


This Douglas? No, I know this face full well:
A gallant Knight he was, his name was Blunt,
Semblably furnished like the King himself.

Ah fool: go with thy soul whether it goes,
A borrowed Title have thou bought too dear.
Why did thou tell me, that thou were a King?

The King has many marching in his Coats.


Now by my Sword, I will kill all his Coats,
I Will murder all his Wardrobe piece by piece,
Until I meet the King.

Up, and away,
Our Soldiers stand full fairly for the day.

Though I could escape shot-free at London, I fear the shot here: here is no
scoring, but upon the pate. Soft who are you? Sir Walter Blunt, there is Honor
for you: here is no vanity, I am as hot as molten Lead, and as heavy too; heaven
keep Lead out of me, I need no more weight then mine own Bowelles. I have
led my rag of Muffins where they are peppered: there is not three of my 150.
left alive, and they for the Towns end, to beg during life. But who comes
here


What, stand'st thou idle here? Lend me thy sword,
Many a Nobleman likes stark and stiff
Under the hooues of vaunting enemies,
Whose deaths are vnreueng^d. Prethy lend me thy sword

O Hal, I prithee give me leave to breath awhile: Turk Gregory never did such
deeds in Arms, as I have done this day. I have paid Percy, I have made him
sure


He is indeed, and living to kill thee:
I prithee lend me thy sword.

Nay Hal, if Percy be alive, thou getst not my Sword; but take my Pistol if
thou will


Give it me: What, is it in the Case?


I Hal, it is hot: There Is that will Sack a City.


What, is it a time to jest and dally now.


If Percy be alive, I Will pierce him: if he do come in my way, so: if he do not,
if I come in his (willingly) let him make a Carbonado of me: I like not such
grinning honor as Sir Walter has: Give me life, which if I can save, so: if
not, honor comes unlooked for, and there is an end


I prithee Harry withdraw thy self, thou bleedest too much: Lord John of
Lancaster, go you with him


Not I, my Lord, unless I did bleed too.


I beseech your Majesty make up,
Least you retirement do amaze your friends.

I will do so:
My Lord of Westmerland lead him to his Tent.

Come my Lord, I Will lead you to your Tent.


Lead me my Lord? I do not need your help;
And heaven forbid a shallow scratch should drive
The Prince of Wales from such a field as this,
Where stained Nobility lies trodden on,
And Rebels Arms triumph in massacres.

We breath too long: Come cousin Westmerland,
Our duty this way lies, for heavens sake come.

By heaven thou have deceived me Lancaster,
I did not think thee Lord of such a spirit:
Before, I loved thee as a Brother, John;
But now, I do respect thee as my Soul.

I saw him hold Lord Percy at the point,
With lustier maintenance then I did look for
Of such an vngrowne Warrior.

O this Boy lends metal to us all.


Another King? They grow like Hydra's heads:
I am the Douglas, fatal to all those
That wear those colors on them. What art thou
That counterfeit'st the person of a King?

The King himself: who Douglas grieves at heart
So many of his shadows thou have met,
And not the very King. I have two Boys
Seek Percy and thy self about the Field:
But seeing thou fall'st on me so luckily,
I will assay thee: so defend thy self.

I fear thou art another counterfeit:
And yet infaith thou bear thee like a King:
But mine I am sure thou art, whoere thou be,
And thus I win thee.

Hold up they head vile Scot, or thou art like
Never to hold it up again: the Spirits
Of valiant Sherly, Stafford, Blunt, are in my Arms;
It is the Prince of Wales that threatens thee,
Who never promises, but he means to pay.
Cheerely My Lord: how fare's your Grace?
Sir Nicholas Gawsey has for succor sent,
And so has Clifton: I Will to Clifton straight.

Stay, and breath awhile.
Thou have redeemed thy lost opinion,
And showed thou make some tender of my life
In this fair rescue thou have brought to me.

O heaven, they did me too much injury,
That ever said I hearkened to your death.
If it were so, I might have let alone
The insulting hand of Douglas over you,
Which would have been as speedy in your end,
As all the poisonous Potions in the world,
And saved the Treacherous labor of your Son.

Make up to Clifton, I Will to Sir Nicholas Gausey.


If I mistake not, thou art Harry Monmouth.


Thou speak as if I would deny my name.


My name is Harrie Percie.


Why then I see a very valiant rebel of that name.
I am the Prince of Wales, and think not Percy,
To share with me in glory any more:
Two Stars keep not their motion in one Sphere,
Nor can one England brook a double reign,
Of Harry Percy, and the Prince of Wales.

Nor shall it Harry, for the hour is come
To end the one of us; and would to heaven,
Thy name in Arms, were now as great as mine.

I Will make it greater, ere I part from thee,
And all the budding Honors on thy Crest,
I Will crop, to make a Garland for my head.

I can no longer brook thy Vanities.


Well said Hal, to it Hal. Nay you shall find no Boys play here, I can tell
you


Oh Harry, thou have robbed me of my youth:
I better brook the loss of brittle life,
Then those proud Titles thou have won of me,
They wound my thoghts worse, then the sword my flesh:
But thought's the slave of Life, and Life, Times fool;
And Time, that takes survey of all the world,
Must have a stop. O, I could Prophecy,
But that the Earth, and the cold hand of death,
Lies on my Tongue: No Percy, thou art dust
And food for --

For Worme^, brave Percy. Farewell great heart:
Ill-weau'd Ambition, how much art thou shrunk?
When that this body did contain a spirit,
A Kingdom for it was too small a bound:
But now two paces of the vilest Earth
Is room enough. This Earth that bears the dead,
Bears not alive so stout a Gentleman.
If thou were sensible of courtesy,
I should not make so great a show of Zeal.
But let my favors hide thy mangled face,
And even in thy behalf, I Will thank my self
For doing these fair Rites of Tenderness.
Adieu, and take thy praise with thee to heaven,
Thy ignomy sleep with thee in the grave,
But not remembered in thy Epitaph.
What? Old Acquaintance? Could not all this flesh
Keep in a little life? Poor Jack, farewell:
I could have better spared a better man.
O, I should have a heavy miss of thee,
If I were much in love with Vanity.
Death has not struck so fat a Dear to day,
Though many dearer in this bloody Fray:
Imbowell'd will I see thee by and by,
Till then, in blood, by Noble Percie lie.

Imbowell'd? If thou imbowell me to day, I Will give you leave to powder me, and
eat me too to morrow. 'Twas time to counterfeit, or that hot Termagant Scot,
had paid the scot and lot too, Counterfeit? I am no counterfeit; to dye, is to
be a counterfeit, for he is but the counterfeit of a man, who has not the
life of a man: But to counterfeit dying, when a man thereby lives, is to be no
counterfeit, but the true and perfect image of life indeed. The better part of
Valor, is Discretion; in the which better part, I have saved my life. I am
affraide of this Gunpowder Percy though he be dead. How if he should
counterfeit too, and rise? I am afraid he would prove the better counterfeit:
therefore I Will make him sure: yea, and I Will swear I killed him. Why may not he
rise as well as I: Nothing confutes me but eyes, and no-bodie sees me.
Therefore sir, with a new wound in your thigh come you along me


Come Brother John, full bravely have thou flesht thy Maiden sword.


But soft, who have we here?
Did you not tell me this Fat man was dead?

I did, I saw him dead,
Breathless, and bleeding on the ground: Art thou alive?
Or is it fantasy that plays upon our eyesight?
I prithee speak, we will not trust our eyes
Without our ears. Thou art not what thou seem.

No, that is certain: I am not a double man: but if I be not Jack Falstaff,
then am I a Jack: There is Percy, if your Father will do me any Honor, so: if
not, let him kill the next Percie himself. I look to be either Earl or Duke,
I can assure you


Why, Percy I killed my self, and saw thee dead.


Did thou? Lord, Lord, how the world is given to Lying? I grant you I was
down, and out of Breath, and so was he, but we rose both at an instant, and
fought a long hour by Shrewsburie clock. If I may be believed, so: if not,
let them that should reward Valor, bear the sin upon their own heads. I Will
take it on my death I gave him this wound in the Thigh: if the man were alive,
and would deny it, I would make him eat a piece of my sword


This is the strangest Tale that e're I heard.


This is the strangest Fellow, Brother John.
Come bring your luggage Nobly on your back:
For my part, if a lie may do thee grace,
I Will gil'd it with the happiest terms I have.
The Trumpets sound Retreat, the day is ours:
Come Brother, let us to the highest of the field,
To see what Friends are living, who are dead.

I Will follow as they say, for Reward. He that rewards me, heaven reward him. If
I do grow great again, I Will grow less? For I Will purge, and leave Sack, and live
cleanly, as a Nobleman should do


Thus ever did Rebellion find Rebuke.
Ill-spirited Worcester, did we not send Grace,
Pardon, and terms of Love to all of you?
And would thou turn our offers contrary?
Misuse the tenor of thy Kinsmans trust?
Three Knights upon our party slain to day,
A Noble Earl, and many a creature else,
Had been alive this hour,
If like a Christian thou had truly borne
Betwixt out Armies, true Intelligence.

What I have done, my safety urged me to,
And I embrace this fortune patiently,
Since not to be avoided, it falls on me.

Bear Worcester to death, and Vernon too:
Other Offenders we will pause upon.
How goes the Field?

The Noble Scot Lord Douglas, when he saw
The fortune of the day quite turned from him,
The Noble Percy slain, and all his men,
Upon the foot of fear, fled with the rest;
And falling from a hill, he was so bruiz'd
That the pursuers took him. At my Tent
The Douglas is, and I beseech your Grace.
I may dispose of him.

With all my heart.


Then Brother John of Lancaster,
To you this honorable bounty shall belong:
Go to the Douglas, and deliver him
Up to his pleasure, ransomlesse and free:
His Valor shown upon our Crests to day,
Has taught us how to cherish such high deeds,
Even in the bosom of our Adversaries.

Then this remains: that we divide our Power.
You Son John, and my Cousin Westmerland
Toward York shall bend you, with your dearest speed
To meet Northumberland, and the Prelate Scroope,
Who (as we hear) are busily in Arms.
My Self, and you Son Harry will toward Wales,
To fight with Glendower, and the Earl of March.
Rebellion in this Land shall lose his way,
Meeting the Check of such another day:
And since this Business so fair is done,
Let us not leave till all our own be won.


