I Wonder how the King escaped our hands?


While we pursued the Horsemen of ye North,
He slyly stole away, and left his men:
Whereat the great Lord of Northumberland,
Whose Warlike ears could never brook retreat,
Cheered up the drouping Army, and himself.
Lord Clifford and Lord Stafford all a-brest
Charged our maine Battles Front: and breaking in,
Were by the Swords of common Soldiers slain.

Lord Staffords Father, Duke of Buckingham,
Is either slain or wounded dangerous.
I cleft his Beauer with a downright blow:
That this is true (Father) behold his blood.

And Brother, here is the Earl of Wiltshires blood,
Whom I encountered as the Battles joined.

Speak thou for me, and tell them what I did.


Richard has best deserved of all my sons:
But is your Grace dead, my Lord of Somerset?

Such hope have all the line of John of Gaunt.


Thus do I hope to shake King Henry's head.


And so do I, victorious Prince of York.
Before I see thee seated in that Throne,
Which now the House of Lancaster usurps,
I vow by Heaven, these eyes shall never close.
This is the Palace of the fearful King,
And this the Regal Seat: possess it York,
For this is thine, and not King Henry's Heirs.

Assist me then, sweet Warwick, and I will,
For hither we have broken in by force.

We Will all assist you: he that flies, shall dye:


Thanks gentle Norfolk, stay by me my Lords,
And Soldiers stay and lodge by me this Night.

And when the King comes, offer him no violence,
Unless he seek to thrust you out perforce.

The Queen this day here holds her Parliament,
But little thinks we shall be of her counsel,
By words or blows here let us win our right.

Armed as we are, let us stay within this House.


The bloody Parliament shall this be called,
Unless Plantagenet, Duke of York, be King,
And bashful Henry deposed, whose Cowardice
Has made us by-words to our enemies.

Then leave me not, my Lords be resolute,
I mean to take possession of my Right.

Neither the King, nor he that loves him best,
The prowdest he that holds up Lancaster,
Dares stir a Wing, if Warwick shake his Bells.
I Will plant Plantagenet, root him up who dares:
Resolve thee Richard, claim the English Crown.

My Lords, look where the sturdie Rebel sits,
Even in the Chair of State: belike he means,
Backed by the power of Warwick, that false Peer,
To aspire unto the Crown, and reign as King.
Earl of Northumberland, he slew thy Father,
And thine, Lord Clifford, and you both have vowed revenge
On him, his sons, his favorites, and his friends.

If I be not, Heavens be revenged on me.


The hope thereof, makes Clifford mourn in Steel.


What, shall we suffer this? lets pluck him down,
My heart for anger burns, I cannot brook it.

Be patient, gentle Earl of Westmerland.


Patience is for Poultroones, such as he:
He durst not sit there, had your Father lived.
My gracious Lord, here in the Parliament
Let us assail the Family of York.

Well have thou spoken, Cousin be it so.


Ah, know you not the City favors them,
And they have troops of Soldiers at their beck?

But when the Duke is slain, they will quickly fly.


Far be the thought of this from Henry's heart,
To make a Shambles of the Parliament House.
Cousin of Exeter, frowns, words, and threats,
Shall be the War that Henry means to use.
Thou factious Duke of York descend my Throne,
And kneel for grace and mercy at my feet,
I am thy Sovereign.

I am thine.


For shame come down, he made thee Duke of York.


It was my Inheritance, as the Earldom was.


Thy Father was a Traitor to the Crown.


Exeter thou art a Traitor to the Crown,
In following this usurping Henry.

Whom should he follow, but his natural King?


True Clifford, that is Richard Duke of York.


And shall I stand, and thou sit in my Throne?


It must and shall be so, content thy self.


Be Duke of Lancaster, let him be King.


He is both King, and Duke of Lancaster,
And that the Lord of Westmerland shall maintain.

And Warwick shall disprove it. You forget,
That we are those which chased you from the field,
And slew your Fathers, and with Colors spread
Marched through the City to the Palace Gates.

Yes Warwick, I remember it to my grief,
And by his Soul, thou and thy House shall rue it.

Plantagenet, of thee and these thy Sons,
Thy Kinsmen, and thy Friends, I Will have more lives
Then drops of blood were in my Fathers Veins.

Urge it no more, left that in stead of words,
I send thee, Warwick, such a Messenger,
As shall revenge his death, before I stir.

Poor Clifford, how I scorn his worthless Threats.


Will you we show our Title to the Crown?
If not, our Swords shall plead it in the field.

What Title have thou Traitor to the Crown?
My Father was as thou art, Duke of York,
Thy Grandfather Roger Mortimer, Earl of March.
I am the Son of Henry the Fifth,
Who made the Dolphin and the French to stoop,
And seized upon their Towns and Provinces.

Talk not of France, since thou have lost it all.


The Lord Protector lost it, and not I:
When I was crowned, I was but nine months old.

You are old enough now,
And yet me thinks you loose:
Father tear the Crown from the Usurpers Head.

Sweet Father do so, set it on your Head.


Good Brother,
As thou love and honor Arms,
Let Us fight it out, and not stand cauilling thus.

Sound Drums and Trumpets, and the King will fly.


Sons peace.


Peace thou, and give King Henry leave to speak.


Plantagenet shall speak first: Hear him Lords,
And be you silent and attentive too,
For he that interrupts him, shall not live.

Think thou, that I will leave my Kingly Throne,
Wherein my Grandsire and my Father sat?
No: first shall War unpeople this my Realm;
I, and their Colors often borne in France,
And now in England, to our hearts great sorrow,
Shall be my Winding Sheet. Why faint you Lords?
My Title's good, and better far then his.

Prove it Henry, and thou shall be King.


Henry the Fourth by Conquest got the Crown.


'Twas by Rebellion against his King.


I know not what to say, my Titles weak:
Tell me, may not a King adopt an Heir?

What then?


And if he may, then am I lawful King:
For Richard, in the view of many Lords,
Resigned the Crown to Henry the Fourth,
Whose Heir my Father was, and I am his.

He rose against him, being his Sovereign,
And made him to resign his Crown perforce.

Suppose, my Lords, he did it vnconstrayn'd,
Think you 'twere prejudicial to his Crown?

No: for he could not so resign his Crown,
But that the next Heir should succeed and reign.

Art thou against us, Duke of Exeter?


His is the right, and therefore pardon me.


Why whisper you, my Lords, and answer not?


My Conscience tells me he is lawful King.


All will revolt from me, and turn to him.


Plantagenet, for all the Claim thou lay'st,
Think not, that Henry shall be so deposed.

Deposed he shall be, in despite of all.


Thou art deceived:
It Is not thy Southern power
Of Essex, Norfolk, Suffolk, nor of Kent,
Which makes thee thus presumptuous and proud,
Can set the Duke up in despite of me.

King Henry, be thy Title right or wrong,
Lord Clifford vows to fight in thy defense:
May that ground gape, and swallow me alive,
Where I shall kneel to him that slew my Father.

Oh Clifford, how thy words revive my heart.


Henry of Lancaster, resign thy Crown:
What mutter you, or what conspire you Lords?

Do right unto this Princely Duke of York,
Or I will fill the House with armed men,
And over the Chair of State, where now he sits,
Write up his Title with usurping blood.

My Lord of Warwick, hear but one word,
Let me for this my life time reign as King.

Confirm the Crown to me and to mine Heirs,
And thou shall reign in quiet while thou live.

I am content: Richard Plantagenet
Enjoy the Kingdom after my decease.

What wrong is this unto the Prince, your Son?


What good is this to England, and himself?


Base, fearful, and despayring Henry.


How have thou injured both thy self and us?


I cannot stay to hear these Articles.


Nor I.


Come Cousin, let us tell the Queen these News.


Farewell faint-hearted and degenerate King,
In whose cold blood no spark of Honor bides.

Be thou a prey unto the House of York,
And dye in Bands, for this unmanly deed.

In dreadful War may thou be overcome,
Or live in peace abandoned and despised.

Turn this way Henry, and regard them not.


They seek revenge, and therefore will not yield.


Ah Exeter.


Why should you sigh, my Lord?


Not for my self Lord Warwick, but my Son,
Whom I unnaturally shall dis-inherite.
But be it as it may: I here entayle
The Crown to thee and to thine Heirs for ever,
Conditionally, that here thou take an Oath,
To cease this Civil War: and whilst I live,
To honor me as thy King, and Sovereign:
And neither by Treason nor Hostility,
To seek to put me down, and reign thy self.

This Oath I willingly take, and will perform.


Long live King Henry: Plantagenet embrace him.


And long live thou, and these thy forward Sons.


Now York and Lancaster are reconciled.


Accursed be he that seeks to make them foes.


Farewell my gracious Lord, I Will to my Castle.


And I Will keep London with my Soldiers.


And I to Norfolk with my follower^.


And I unto the Sea, from whence I came.


And I with grief and sorrow to the Court.


Here comes the Queen,
Whose Looks be wray her anger:
I Will steal away.

Exeter so will I.


Nay, go not from me, I will follow thee.


Be patient gentle Queen, and I will stay.


Who can be patient in such extremes?
Ah wretched man, would I had died a Maid?
And never seen thee, never borne thee Son,
Seeing thou have proved so unnatural a Father.
Has he deserved to loose his Birthright thus?
Had thou but loved him half so well as I,
Or felt that pain which I did for him once,
Or nourisht him, as I did with my blood;
Thou would have left thy dearest heart-blood there,
Rather then have made that savage Duke thine Heir,
And dis-inherited thine only Son.

Father, you cannot dis-inherite me:
If you be King, why should not I succeed?

Pardon me Margaret, pardon me sweet Son,
The Earl of Warwick and the Duke enforced me.

Enforced thee? Art thou King, and wilt be forced?
I shame to hear thee speak: ah timorous Wretch,
Thou have undone thy self, thy Son, and me,
And given unto the House of York such head,
As thou shall reign but by their sufferance.
To entayle him and his Heirs unto the Crown,
What is it, but to make thy Sepulcher,
And creep into it far before thy time?
Warwick is Chancellor, and the Lord of Callice,
Stern Falconbridge commands the Narrow Seas,
The Duke is made Protector of the Realm,
And yet shall thou be safe? Such safety finds
The trembling Lamb, inuironned with Wolves.
Had I been there, which am a silly Woman,
The Soldiers should have tossed me on their Pikes,
Before I would have granted to that Act.
But thou preferr'st thy Life, before thine Honor.
And seeing thou do, I here divorce my self,
Both from thy Table Henry, and thy Bed,
Until that Act of Parliament be repealed,
Whereby my Son is dis-inherited.
The Northern Lords, that have forsworn thy Colors,
Will follow mine, if once they see them spread:
And spread they shall be, to thy foul disgrace,
And utter ruin of the House of York*
Thus do I leave thee: Come Son, let us away,
Our Army is ready; come, we will after them.

Stay gentle Margaret, and hear me speak.


Thou have spoke too much already: get thee gone.


Gentle Son Edward, thou will stay me?


I, to be murdered by his Enemies.


When I return with victory to the field,
I Will see your Grace: till then, I Will follow her.

Come Son away, we may not linger thus.


Poor Queen,
How love to me, and to her Son,
Has made her break out into terms of Rage.
Revenged may she be on that hateful Duke,
Whose haughty spirit, winged with desire,
Will cost my Crown, and like an empty Eagle,
Tire on the flesh of me, and of my Son.
The loss of those three Lords torments my heart:
I Will write unto them, and entreat them fair;
Come Cousin, you shall be the Messenger.

And I, I hope, shall reconcile them all.


Brother, though I be youngest, give me leave.


No, I can better play the Orator.


But I have reasons strong and forceable.


Why how now Sons, and Brother, at a strife?
What is your Quarrel? how began it first?

No Quarrel, but a slight Contention.


About what?


About that which concerns your Grace and us,
The Crown of England, Father, which is yours.

Mine Boy? not till King Henry be dead.


Your Right depends not on his life, or death.


Now you are Heir, therefore enjoy it now:
By giving the House of Lancaster leave to breathe,
It will out-runne you, Father, in the end.

I took an Oath, that he should quietly reign.


But for a Kingdom any Oath may be broken:
I would break a thousand Oaths, to reign one year.

No: God forbid your Grace should be forsworn.


I shall be, if I claim by open War.


I Will prove the contrary, if you will hear me speak.


Thou can not, Son: it is impossible.


An Oath is of no moment, being not took
Before a true and lawful Magistrate,
That has authority over him that swears.
Henry had none, but did usurp the place.
Then seeing 'twas he that made you to depose,
Your Oath, my Lord, is vain and frivolous.
Therefore to Arms: and Father do but think,
How sweet a thing it is to wear a Crown,
Within whose Circuit is Elysium,
And all that Poets feign of Bliss and Joy.
Why do we linger thus? I cannot rest,
Until the White Rose that I wear, be died
Even in the lukewarm blood of Henry's heart.

Richard enough: I will be King, or dye.
Brother, thou shall to London presently,
And whet on Warwick to this Enterprise.
Thou Richard shall to the Duke of Norfolk,
And tell him privily of our intent.
You Edward shall unto my Lord Cobham,
With whom the Kentishmen will willingly rise.
In them I trust: for they are Soldiers,
Witty, courteous, liberal, full of spirit.
While you are thus employed, what rests more?
But that I seek occasion how to rise,
And yet the King not privy to my Drift,
Nor any of the House of Lancaster.
But stay, what News? Why comm'st thou in such post?

The Queen,
With all the Northern Earls and Lords,
Intend here to besiege you in your Castle.
She is hard by, with twenty thousand men:
And therefore fortify your Hold, my Lord.

I, with my Sword.
What? think thou, that we fear them?
Edward and Richard, you shall stay with me,
My Brother Mountague shall post to London.
Let Noble Warwick, Cobham, and the rest,
Whom we have left Protectors of the King,
With powrefull Policy strengthen themselves,
And trust not simple Henry, nor his Oaths.

Brother, I go: I Will win them, fear it not.
And thus most humbly I do take my leave.

Sir John, and Sir Hugh Mortimer, mine Uncles,
You are come to Sandall in a happy hour.
The Army of the Queen mean to besiege us.

She shall not need, we will meet her in the field.


What, with five thousand men?


I, with five hundred, Father, for a need.
A Woman's general: what should we fear?

I hear their Drums:
Let Us set our men in order,
And issue forth, and bid them Battle straight.

Five men to twenty: though the odds be great,
I doubt not, Uncle, of our Victory*
Many a Battle have I won in France,
When as the Enemy has been ten to one:
Why should I not now have the like success?

Ah, whither shall I fly, to escape their hands?
Ah Tutor, look where bloody Clifford comes.

Chaplain away, thy Priesthood saues thy life.
As for the Brat of this accursed Duke,
Whose Father slew my Father, he shall dye.

And I, my Lord, will bear him company.


Soldiers, away with him.


Ah Clifford, murder not this innocent Child,
Least thou be hated both of God and Man.

How now? is he dead already?
Or is it fear, that makes him close his eyes?
I Will open them.

So looks the pent-vp Lion over the Wretch,
That trembles under his devouring Paws:
And so he walks, insulting over his Prey,
And so be comes, to rend his Limbs asunder.
Ah gentle Clifford, kill me with thy Sword,
And not with such a cruel threatening Look.
Sweet Clifford hear me speak, before I dye:
I am too mean a subject for thy Wrath,
Be thou revenged on men, and let me live.

In vain thou speak, poor Boy:
My Fathers blood has stopped the passage
Where thy words should enter.

Then let my Fathers blood open it again,
He is a man, and Clifford cope with him.

Had I thy Brethren here, their lives and thine
Were not revenge sufficient for me:
No, if I dug up thy forefathers Graves,
And hung their rotten Coffins up in Chains,
It could not slake mine ire, nor ease my heart.
The sight of any of the House of York,
Is as a fury to torment my Soul:
And till I root out their accursed Line,
And leave not one alive, I live in Hell.
Therefore --

Oh let me pray, before I take my death:
To thee I pray; sweet Clifford pity me.

Such pity as my Rapiers point affords.


I never did thee harm: why will thou slay me?


Thy Father has.


But 'twas ere I was borne.
Thou have one Son, for his sake pity me,
Least in revenge thereof, since God is just,
He be as miserably slain as I.
Ah, let me live in Prison all my days,
And when I give occasion of offense,
Then let me dye, for now thou have no cause.

No cause? thy Father slew my Father: therefore dye.


Dij faciant laudis summa sit ista tuae.


Plantagenet, I come Plantagenet:
And this thy Sons blood cleaving to my Blade,
Shall rust upon my Weapon, till thy blood
Congealed with this, do make me wipe off both.

The Army of the Queen has got the field:
My Uncles both are slain, in rescuing me;
And all my followers, to the eager foe
Turn back, and fly, like Ships before the Wind,
Or Lambs pursued by hunger-starued Wolves.
My Sons, God knows what has bechanced them:
But this I know, they have demeaned themselves
Like men borne to Renown, by Life or Death.
Three times did Richard make a Lane to me,
And thrice cry'de, Courage Father, fight it out:
And full as often came Edward to my side,
With Purple Faulchion, painted to the Hilt,
In blood of those that had encountered him:
And when the hardyest Warriors did retire,
Richard cry'de, Charge, and give no foot of ground,
And cry'de, A Crown, or else a glorious Tomb,
A Scepter, or an Earthly Sepulcher.
With this we charged again: but out alas,
We bodg'd again, as I have seen a Swan
With bootlesse labor swim against the Tide,
And spend her strength with ouer-matching Waves.
Ah hark, the fatal followers do pursue,
And I am faint, and cannot fly their fury:
And were I strong, I would not shun their fury.
The Sands are numbered, that makes up my Life,
Here must I stay, and here my Life must end.
Come bloody Clifford, rough Northumberland,
I dare your quenchlesse fury to more rage:
I am your Butt, and I abide your Shot.

Yield to our mercy, proud Plantagenet.


I, to such mercy, as his ruthlesse Arm
With downright payment, showed unto my Father.
Now Phaeton has tumbled from his Carre,
And made an Evening at the Noone-tide Prick.

My ashes, as the Phoenix, may bring forth
A Bird, that will revenge upon you all:
And in that hope, I throw mine eyes to Heaven,
Scorning what ere you can afflict me with.
Why come you not? what, multitudes, and fear?

So Cowards fight, when they can fly no further,
So Doves do peck the Faulcons piercing Tallons,
So desperate Thieves, all hopeless of their Lives,
Breathe out Inuectiues against the Officers.

Oh Clifford, but bethink thee once again,
And in thy thought ore-run my former time:
And if thou can, for blushing, view this face,
And bite thy tongue, that slanders him with Cowardice,
Whose frown has made thee faint and fly ere this.

I will not bandie with thee word for word,
But buckler with thee blows twice two for one.

Hold valiant Clifford, for a thousand causes
I would prolong a while the Traitors Life:
Wrath makes him deaf; speak thou Northumberland.

Hold Clifford, do not honor him so much,
To prick thy finger, though to wound his heart.
What valor were it, when a Curre does grinne,
For one to thrust his Hand between his Teeth,
When he might spurn him with his Foot away?
It is Wars prize, to take all Vantages,
And ten to one, is no impeach of Valor.

I, I, so strives the Woodcocke with the Gynne.


So does the Connie struggle in the Net.


So triumph Thieves upon their conquered Booty,
So True men yield with Robbers, so o're-matcht.

What would your Grace have done unto him now?


Brave Warriors, Clifford and Northumberland,
Come make him stand upon this Molehill here,
That raught at Mountains with outstretched Arms,
Yet parted but the shadow with his Hand.
What, was it you that would be Englands King?
Was It you that reuell'd in our Parliament,
And made a Preachment of your high Descent?
Where are your Mess of Sons, to back you now?
The wanton Edward, and the lusty George?
And where is that valiant Crook-back Prodigy,
Dickie, your Boy, that with his grumbling voice
Was wont to cheer his Dad in Mutinies?
Or with the rest, where is your Darling, Rutland?
Look York, I stayn'd this Napkin with the blood
That valiant Clifford, with his Rapiers point,
Made issue from the Bosom of the Boy:
And if thine eyes can water for his death,
I give thee this to dry thy Cheeks withal.
Alas poor York, but that I hate thee deadly,
I should lament thy miserable state.
I prithee grieve, to make me merry, York.
What, has thy fiery heart so parcht thine entrayles,
That not a Tear can fall, for Rutlands death?
Why art thou patient, man? thou should be mad:
And I, to make thee mad, do mock thee thus.
Stamp, rave, and fret, that I may sing and dance.
Thou would be fee'd, I see, to make me sport:
York cannot speak, unless he wear a Crown.
A Crown for York; and Lords, bow low to him:
Hold you his hands, whilst I do set it on.
I marry Sir, now looks he like a King:
I, this is he that took King Henry's Chair,
And this is he was his adopted Heir.
But how is it, that great Plantagenet
Is crowned so soon, and broke his solemn Oath?
As I bethink me, you should not be King,
Till our King Henry had shook hands with Death.
And will you pale your head in Henry's Glory,
And rob his Temples of the Diadem,
Now in his Life, against your holy Oath?
Oh it is a fault too too unpardonable.
Off with the Cro^ne; and with the Crown, his Head,
And whilst we breathe, take time to do him dead.

That is my Office, for my Fathers sake.


Nay stay, let us hear the Orizons he makes.


Shee-Wolfe of France,
But worse then Wolves of France,
Whose Tongue more poisons then the Adders Tooth:
How ill-beseeming is it in thy Sex,
To triumph like an Amazonian Trull,
Upon their Woes, whom Fortune captiuates?
But that thy Face is Vizard-like, unchanging,
Made impudent with use of evil deeds.
I would assay, proud Queen, to make thee blush.
To tell thee whence thou came, of whom derived,
Were shame enough, to shame thee,
Were thou not shameless.
Thy Father bears the type of King of Naples,
Of both the Sicils, and Jerusalem,
Yet not so wealthy as an English Yeoman.
Has that poor Monarch taught thee to insult?
It needs not, nor it boots thee not, proud Queen,
Unless the Adage must be verified,
That Beggars mounted, run their Horse to death.
It Is Beauty that does often make Women proud,
But God he knows, thy share thereof is small.
It Is Virtue, that does make them most admired,
The contrary, does make thee wondered at.
It Is Government that makes them seem Divine,
The want thereof, makes thee abominable.
Thou art as opposite to every good,
As the Antipodes are unto us,
Or as the South to the Septentrion.
Oh Tygres Heart, wrapped in a Woman's Hide,
How could thou drayne the Lifeblood of the Child,
To bid the Father wipe his eyes withal,
And yet be seen to bear a Woman's face?
Women are soft, mild, pitiful, and flexible;
Thou* stern, obdurate, flintie, rough, remorselesse.
Bidst thou me rage? why now thou have thy wish.
Would have me weep? why now thou have thy will.
For raging Wind blows up incessant showers,
And when the Rage allayes, the Rain begins.
These Tears are my sweet Rutlands Obsequies,
And every drop cries vengeance for his death,
Against thee fell Clifford, and thee false French-woman.

Beshrew me, but his passions moves me so,
That hardly can I check my eyes from Tears.

That Face of his,
The hungry Caniballs would not have touched,
Would not have stayn'd with blood:
But you are more inhumane, more inexorable,
Oh, ten times more then Tigers of Hyrcania.
See, ruthlesse Queen, a hapless Fathers Tears:
This Cloth thou dipd'st in blood of my sweet Boy,
And I with Tears do wash the blood away.
Keep thou the Napkin, and go boast of this,
And if thou tell the heavy story right,
Upon my Soul, the hearers will shed Tears:
Yea, even my Foes will shed fast-falling Tears,
And say, Alas, it was a pittious deed.
There, take the Crown, and with the Crown, my Curse,
And in thy need, such comfort come to thee,
As now I reap at thy too cruel hand.
Hard-hearted Clifford, take me from the World,
My Soul to Heaven, my Blood upon your Heads.

Had he been slaughter-man to all my Kin,
I should not for my Life but weep with him,
To see how inly Sorrow gripes his Soul.

What, weeping ripe, my Lord Northumberland?
Think but upon the wrong he did us all,
And that will quickly dry thy melting Tears.

Here Is for my Oath, here is for my Fathers Death.


And here is to right our gentle-hearted King.


Open thy Gate of Mercy, gracious God,
My Soul flies through these wounds, to seek out thee.

Off with his Head, and set it on York Gates,
So York may ouer-looke the Town of York.

I wonder how our Princely Father escaped:
Or whether he be escaped away, or no,
From Cliffords and Northumberlands pursuit?
Had he been taken, we should have heard the news;
Had he been slain, we should have heard the news:
Or had he escaped* me thinks we should have heard
The happy tidings of his good escape.
How fares my Brother? why is he so sad?

I cannot joy, until I be resolved
Where our right valiant Father is become.
I saw him in the Battle range about,
And watched him how he singled Clifford forth*
Me thought he bore him in the thickest troop,
As does a Lion in a Heard of Neat,
Or as a Bear encompassed round with Dogs:
Who having pincht a few, and made them cry,
The rest stand all aloof, and bark at him.
So fared our Father with his Enemies,
So fled his Enemies my Warlike Father:
Me thinks it is prize enough to be his Son.
See how the Morning opes her golden Gates,
And takes her farewell of the glorious Sun*
How well resembles it the prime of Youth,
Trimmed like a Yonker, prauncing to his Love?

Dazzle mine eyes, or do I see three Suns?


Three glorious Suns, each one a perfect Sun,
Not separated with the racking Clouds,
But seuer'd in a pale cleare-shining Sky.
See, see, they join, embrace, and seem to kiss,
As if they vowed some League inviolable.
Now are they but one Lamp, one Light, one Sun:
In this, the Heaven figures some event.

It Is wondrous strange,
The like yet never heard of.
I think it cites us (Brother) to the field,
That we, the Sons of brave Plantagenet,
Each one already blazing by our meedes,
Should notwithstanding join our Lights together,
And ouer-shine the Earth, as this the World.
What ere it bodes, hence-forward will I bear
Upon my Targuet three fair shining Suns.

Nay, bear three Daughters:
By your leave, I speak it,
You love the Breeder better then the Male.
But what art thou, whose heavy Looks foretell
Some dreadful story hanging on thy Tongue?

Ah, one that was a woeful looker on,
When as the Noble Duke of York was slain,
Your Princely Father, and my loving Lord.

Oh speak no more, for I have heard too much.


Say how he died, for I will hear it all.


Environed he was with many foes,
And stood against them, as the hope of Troy
Against the Greeks, that would have entered Troy.
But Hercules himself must yield to odds:
And many strokes, though with a little Axe,
Hewes down and fells the hardest-tymber'd Oak.
By many hands your Father was subdued,
But only slaught'red by the irefull Arm
Of vn-relenting Clifford, and the Queen:
Who crowned the gracious Duke in high despite,
Laughed in his face: and when with grief he wept,
The ruthlesse Queen gave him, to dry his Cheeks,
A Napkin, steeped in the harmless blood
Of sweet young Rutland, by rough Clifford slain:
And after many scorns, many foul taunts,
They took his Head, and on the Gates of York
They set the same, and there it does remain,
The saddest spectacle that ere I viewed.

Sweet Duke of York, our Prop to lean upon,
Now thou art gone* we have no Staff, no Stay.
Oh Clifford, boyst'rous Clifford thou have slain
The flower of Europe, for his Cheualrie,
And trecherously have thou vanquished him,
For hand to hand he would have vanquished thee.
Now my Souls Palace is become a Prison:
Ah, would she break from hence, that this my body
Might in the ground be closed up in rest:
For never henceforth shall I joy again:
Never, oh never shall I see more joy.

I cannot weep: for all my bodies moisture
Scarce serves to quench my Furnace-burning heart:
Nor can my tongue unload my hearts great burden,
For selfsame wind that I should speak withal,
Is kindling coals that fires all my breast,
And burns me up with flames, that tears would quench*
To weep, is to make less the depth of grief:
Tears then for Babes; Blows, and Revenge for me.
Richard, I bear thy name, I Will venge thy death,
Or dye renowned by attempting it.

His name that valiant Duke has left with thee:
His Dukedom, and his Chair with me is left.

Nay, if thou be that Princely Eagles Bird,
Show thy descent by gazing against the Sun:
For Chair and Dukedom, Throne and Kingdom say,
Either that is thine, or else thou were not his.

How now fair Lords? What fair? What news abroad?


Great Lord of Warwick, if we should recompt
Our balefull news, and at each words deliverance
Stab Poniards in our flesh, till all were told,
The words would add more anguish then the wounds.
O valiant Lord, the Duke of York is slain.

O Warwick, Warwick, that Plantagenet
Which held thee dearly, as his Souls Redemption,
Is by the stern Lord Clifford done to death.

Ten days ago, I drowned these news in tears,
And now to add more measure to your woes,
I come to tell you things since then befalne.
After the bloody Fray at Wakefield fought,
Where your brave Father breathed his latest gasp,
Tidings, as swiftly as the Posts could run,
Were brought me of your Loss, and his Depart.
I then in London, keeper of the King,
Mustered my Soldiers, gathered flocks of Friends,
Marched toward S. Albons, to intercept the Queen,
Bearing the King in my behalf along:
For by my Scouts, I was advertised
That she was coming with a full intent
To dash our late Decree in Parliament,
Touching King Henry's Oath, and your Succession:
Short Tale to make, we at S. Albons met,
Our Battles joined, and both sides fiercely fought:
But whether 'twas the coldness of the King,
Who looked full gently on his warlike Queen,
That robbed my Soldiers of their heated Spleen.
Or whether 'twas report of her success,
Or more then common fear of Cliffords Rigor,
Who thunders to his Captives, Blood and Death,
I cannot judge: but to conclude with truth,
Their Weapons like to Lightning, came and went:
Our Soldiers like the Night-Owles lazy flight,
Or like a lazy Thresher with a Flaile,
Fell gently down, as if they struck their Friends.
I cheered them up with justice of our Cause,
With promise of high pay, and great Rewards:
But all in vain, they had no heart to fight,
And we (in them) no hope to win the day,
So that we fled: the King unto the Queen,
Lord George, your Brother, Norfolk, and my Self,
In haste, post haste, are come to join with you:
For in the Marches here we heard you were,
Making another Head, to fight again.

Where is the Duke of Norfolk, gentle Warwick?
And when came George from Burgundy to England?

Some six miles off the Duke is with the Soldiers,
And for your Brother he was lately sent
From your kind Aunt Duchess of Burgundy,
With aid of Soldiers to this needful War.

'Twas odds belike, when valiant Warwick fled;
Often have I heard his praises in Pursuit,
But never till now, his Scandal of Retire.

Nor now my Scandal Richard, do thou hear:
For thou shall know this strong right hand of mine,
Can pluck the Diadem from faint Henry's head,
And wring the awefull Scepter from his Fist,
Were he as famous, and as bold in War,
As he is famed for Mildness, Peace, and Prayer.

I know it well Lord Warwick, blame me not,
It Is love I bear thy glories make me speak:
But in this troublous time, what is to be done?
Shall we go throw away our Coats of Steel,
And wrap our bodies in black mourning Gowns,
Numb'ring our Aue-Maries with our Beads?
Or shall we on the Helmets of our Foes
Tell our Devotion with reuengefull Arms?
If for the last, say I, and to it Lords.

Why therefore Warwick came to seek you out,
And therefore comes my Brother Mountague:
Attend me Lords, the proud insulting Queen,
With Clifford, and the haught Northumberland,
And of their Feather, many more proud Birds,
Have wrought the easie-melting King, like Wax.
He swore consent to your Succession,
His Oath enrolled in the Parliament.
And now to London all the crew are gone,
To frustrate both his Oath, and what beside
May make against the house of Lancaster.
Their power (I think) is thirty thousand strong:
Now, if the help of Norfolk, and my self,
With all the Friends that thou brave Earl of March,
Among'st the loving Welshmen can procure,
Will but amount to five and twenty thousand,
Why Via, to London will we march,
And once again, bestride our foaming Steeds,
And once again cry Charge upon our Foes,
But never once again turn back and fly.

I, now me thinks I hear great Warwick speak;
Never may he live to see a Sunshine day,
That cries Retire, if Warwick bid him stay.

Lord Warwick, on thy shoulder will I lean,
And when thou failst (as God forbid the hour)
Must Edward fall, which peril heaven forefend.

No longer Earl of March, but Duke of York:
The next degree, is Englands Royal Throne:
For King of England shall thou be proclaimed
In every Borough as we pass along,
And he that throws not up his cap for joy,
Shall for the Fault make forfeit of his head.
King Edward, valiant Richard Mountague:
Stay we no longer, dreaming of Renown,
But sound the Trumpets, and about our Task.

Then Clifford, were thy heart as hard as Steel,
As thou have shown it flintie by thy deeds,
I come to pierce it, or to give thee mine.

Then strike up Drums, God and S. George for us.

How now? what news?


The Duke of Norfolk sends you word by me,
The Queen is coming with a puissant Host,
And craves your company, for speedy counsel.

Why then it sorts, brave Warriors, let us away.


Welcome my Lord, to this brave town of York,
Yonder Is the head of that Arch-enemy,
That sought to be incompast with your Crown.
Does not the object cheer your heart, my Lord.

I, as the rocks cheer them that fear their wrack,
To see this sight, it irkes my very soul:
Withold revenge (dear God) it is not my fault,
Nor wittingly have I infringed my Vow.

My gracious Liege, this too much lenity
And harmfull pity must be laid aside:
To whom do Lions cast their gentle Looks?
Not to the Beast, that would usurp their Den.
Whose hand is that the Forest Bear does lick?
Not his that spoils her young before her face.
Who scapes the lurking Serpents mortal sting?
Not he that sets his foot upon her back.
The smallest Worm will turn, being trodden on,
And Doves will pecke in safeguard of their Brood.
Ambitious York, did level at thy Crown,
Thou smiling, while he knit his angry brows.
He but a Duke, would have his Son a King,
And raise his issue like a loving Sire.
Thou being a King, blessed with a goodly son,
Did yield consent to disinherit him:
Which argued thee a most unloving Father.
Unreasonable Creatures feed their young,
And though man's face be fearful to their eyes,
Yet in protection of their tender ones,
Who has not seen them even with those wings,
Which sometime they have used with fearful flight,
Make war with him that climbed unto their nest,
Offering their own lives in their yongs defense?
For shame, my Liege, make them your President:
Were it not pity that this goodly Boy
Should loose his Birthright by his Fathers fault,
And long hereafter say unto his child,
What my great Grandfather, and Grandsire got,
My careless Father fondly gave away.
Ah, what a shame were this? Look on the Boy,
And let his manly face, which promises
Successful Fortune steel thy melting heart,
To hold thine own, and leave thine own with him.

Full well has Clifford played the Orator,
Inferring arguments of mighty force:
But Clifford tell me, did thou never hear,
That things ill got, had ever bad success.
And happy always was it for that Son,
Whose Father for his hoording went to hell:
I Will leave my Son my Virtuous deeds behind,
And would my Father had left me no more:
For all the rest is held at such a Rate,
As brings a thousand fold more care to keep,
Then in possession any jot of pleasure.
Ah Cousin York, would thy best Friends did know,
How it does grieve me that thy head is here.

My Lord cheer up your spirits, our foes are nigh,
And this soft courage makes your Followers faint:
You promised Knighthood to our forward son,
Vnsheath your sword, and dub him presently.
Edward, kneel down.

Edward Plantagenet, arise a Knight,
And learn this Lesson; Draw thy Sword in right.

My gracious Father, by your Kingly leave,
I Will draw it as Apparent to the Crown,
And in that quarrel, use it to the death.

Why that is spoken like a toward Prince.


Royal Commanders, be in readiness,
For with a Band of thirty thousand men,
Comes Warwick backing of the Duke of York,
And in the Towns as they do march along,
Proclaims him King, and many fly to him,
Darraigne your battle, for they are at hand.

I would your Highness would depart the field,
The Queen has best success when you are absent.

I good my Lord, and leave us to our Fortune.


Why, that is my fortune too, therefore I Will stay.


Be it with resolution then to fight.


My Royal Father, cheer these Noble Lords,
And hearten those that fight in your defense:
Vnsheath your Sword, good Father: Cry S. George.

Now perjured Henry, will thou kneel for grace?
And set thy Diadem upon my head?
Or bide the mortal Fortune of the field.

Go rate thy Minions, proud insulting Boy,
Becomes it thee to be thus bold in terms,
Before thy Sovereign, and thy lawful King?

I am his King, and he should bow his knee:
I was adopted Heir by his consent.

Since when, his Oath is broke: for as I hear,
You that are King, though he do wear the Crown,
Have caused him by new Act of Parliament,
To blot out me, and put his own Son in.

And reason too,
Who should succeed the Father, but the Son.

Are you there Butcher? O, I cannot speak.


I Crooke-back, here I stand to answer thee,
Or any he, the proudest of thy sort.

'Twas you that killed young Rutland, was it not?


I, and old York, and yet not satisfied.


For Gods sake Lords give signal to the fight.


What say thou Henry,
Will thou yield the Crown?

Why how now long-tongu'd Warwick, dare you speak?
When you and I, met at S. Albons last,
Your legs did better service then your hands.

Then 'twas my turn to fly, and now it is thine:


You said so much before, and yet you fled.


'Twas not yout valor Clifford drove me thence.


No, nor your manhood that durst make you stay.


Northumberland, I hold thee reverently,
Break off the parley, for scarce I can refrain
The execution of my big-swolne heart
Upon that Clifford, that cruel Child-killer.

I slew thy Father, cal'st thou him a Child?


I like a Dastard, and a treacherous Coward,
As thou didd'st kill our tender Brother Rutland,
But ere Sunset, I Will make thee curse the deed.

Have done with words (my Lords) and hear me speak.


Defy them then, or else hold close thy lips.


I prithee give no limits to my Tongue,
I am a King, and priuiledg'd to speak.

My Liege, the wound that bred this meeting here,
Cannot be cured by Words, therefore be still.

Then Executioner vnsheath thy sword:
By him that made us all, I am resolved,
That Cliffords Manhood, lies upon his tongue.

Say Henry, shall I have my right, or no:
A thousand men have broke their Fasts to day,
That never shall dine, unless thou-yeeld the Crown.

If thou deny, their Blood upon thy head,
For York in justice put's his Armor on.

If that be right, which Warwick says is right,
There is no vvrong, but every thing is right.

Who ever got thee, there thy Mother stands,
For well I vvot, thou have thy Mothers tongue.

But thou art neither like thy Sire nor Damme,
But like a foul misshapen Stygmaticke,
Marked by the Destinies to be avoided,
As venom Toades, or Lizards dreadful stings.

Iron of Naples, hid with English gilt,
Whose Father bears the Title of a King,
(As if a Channel should be called the Sea)
Sham'st thou not, knowing whence thou art extraught,
To let thy tongue detect thy base-borne heart.

A wispe of straw were worth a thousand Crowns,
To make this shameless Callet know her self:
Helen of Greece was fayrer far then thou,
Although thy Husband may be Menelaus;
And never was Agamemnons Brother wronged
By that false Woman, as this King by thee.
His Father reuel'd in the heart of France,
And tamed the King, and made the Dolphin stoop:
And had he matched according to his State,
He might have kept that glory to this day.
But when he took a beggar to his bed,
And graced thy poor Sire with his Bridal day,
Even then that Sunshine brewed a shower for him,
That washed his Fathers fortunes forth of France,
And heaped sedition on his Crown at home:
For what has broached this tumult but thy Pride?
Had thou been meek, our Title still had slept,
And we in pity of the Gentle King,
Had slipped our Claim, until another Age.

But when we saw, our Sunshine made thy Spring,
And that thy Summer bred us no increase,
We set the Axe to thy usurping Root:
And though the edge has something hit our selves,
Yet know thou, since we have begun to strike,
We Will never leave, till we have hewne thee down,
Or bathed thy growing, with our heated bloods.

And in this resolution, I defy thee,
Not willing any longer Conference,
Since thou denied'st the gentle King to speak.
Sound Trumpets, let our bloody Colors wave,
And either Victory, or else a Grave.

Stay Edward.


No wrangling Woman, we will no longer stay,
These words will cost ten thousand lives this day.

Fore-spent with Toil, as Runners with a Race,
I lay me down a little while to breath:
For strokes received, and many blows repaid,
Have robbed my strong knit sinews of their strength,
And spite of spite, needs must I rest awhile.

Smile gentle heaven, or strike ungentle death,
For this world frowns, and Edwards Sun is clowded.

How now my Lord, what hap? what hope of good?


Out hap is loss, our hope but sad despair,
Our ranks are broke, and ruin follows us.
What counsel give you? whether shall we fly?

Bootlesse is flight, they follow us with Wings,
And weak we are, and cannot shun pursuit.

Ah Warwick, why have you withdrawn thy self?
Thy Brothers blood the thirsty earth has drunk,
Broached with the Steely point of Cliffords Lance:
And in the very pangs of death, he cryde,
Like to a dismal Clangor heard from far,
Warwick, revenge; Brother, revenge my death.
So underneath the belly of their Steeds,
That stained their Fetlockes in his smoking blood,
The Noble Gentleman gave up the ghost.

Then let the earth be drunken with our blood:
I Will kill my Horse, because I will not fly:
Why stand we like soft-hearted women here,
Wayling our losses, whiles the Foe does Rage,
And look upon, as if the Tragedy
Were played in lest, by counterfetting Actors.
Here on my knee, I vow to God above,
I Will never pawse again, never stand still,
Till either death has closed these eyes of mine,
Or Fortune given me measure of Revenge.

Oh Warwick, I do bend my knee with thine,
And in this vow do chain my soul to thine:
And ere my knee rise from the Earths cold face*
I throw my hands, mine eyes, my heart to thee,
Thou setter up, and plucker down of Kings:
Beseeching thee (if with thy will it stands)
That to my Foes this body must be prey,
Yet that thy brazen gates of heaven may open,
And give sweet passage to my sinful soul.
Now Lords, take leave until we meet again,
Where ere it be, in heaven, or in earth.

Brother,
Give me thy hand, and gentle Warwick,
Let me embrace thee in my weary arms:
I that did never weep, now melt with woe,
That Winter should cut off our Springtime so.

Away, away:
Once more sweet Lords farewell.

Yet let us altogether to our Troops,
And give them leave to fly, that will not stay:
And call them Pillars that will stand to us:
And if we thrive, promise them such rewards
As Victors wear at the Olympian Games.
This may plant courage in their quailing breasts,
For yet is hope of Life and Victory:
Foreslow no longer, make we hence amain.

Now Clifford, I have singled thee alone,
Suppose this arm is for the Duke of York,
And this for Rutland, both bound to revenge,
Were thou inuiron'd with a Brazen wall.

Now Richard, I am with thee here alone,
This is the hand that stabbed thy Father York,
And this the hand, that slew thy Brother Rutland,
And here is the heart, that triumphs in their death,
And cheeres these hands, that slew thy Sire and Brother,
To execute the like upon thy self,
And so have at thee.

Nay Warwick, single out some other Chase,
For I my self will hunt this Wolf to death.

This battle fares like to the mornings War,
When dying clouds contend, with growing light,
What time the Shepherd blowing of his nails,
Can neither call it perfect day, nor night.
Now swayes it this way, like a Mighty Sea,
Forced by the Tide, to combat with the Wind:
Now swayes it that way, like the selfsame Sea,
Forced to retire by fury of the Wind.
Sometime, the Flood preuailes; and than the Wind:
Now, one the better: then, another best;
Both tugging to be Victors, breast to breast:
Yet neither Conqueror, nor Conquered.
So is the equal poise of this fell War.
Here on this Molehill will I sit me down,
To whom God will, there be the Victory:
For Margaret my Queen, and Clifford too
Have chid me from the Battle: Swearing both,
They prosper best of all when I am thence.
Would I were dead, if Gods good will were so;
For what is in this world, but Grief and Woe.
Oh God! me thinks it were a happy life,
To be no better then a homely Swain,
To sit upon a hill, as I do now,
To carue out Dialls queintly, point by point,
Thereby to see the Minutes how they run:
How many makes the Hour full complete,
How many Hours brings about the Day,
How many Days will finish up the Year,
How many Years, a Mortal man may live.
When this is known, then to divide the Times:
So many Hours, must I tend my Flock;
So many Hours, must I take my Rest:
So many Hours, must I Contemplate:
So many Hours, must I Sport my self:
So many Days, my Ewes have been with young:
So many weeks, ere the poor Fools will Eane:
So many years, ere I shall sheere the Fleece:
So Minutes, Hours, Days, Months, and Years,
Past over to the end they were created,
Would bring white hairs, unto a Quiet grave.
Ah! what a life were this? How sweet? how lovely?
Gives not the Hawthorne bush a sweeter shade
To Shepherds* looking on their silly Sheep,
Then does a rich Imbroider'd Canopie
To Kings, that fear their Subjects treachery?
Oh yes, it does; a thousand fold it does.
And to conclude, the Shepherds homely Curds,
His cold thin drink out of his Leather Bottle,
His wonted sleep, under a fresh trees shade,
All which secure, and sweetly he enioyes,
Is far beyond a Princes Delicates:
His Viands sparkling in a Golden Cup,
His body couched in a curious bed,
When Care, Mistrust, and Treason waits on him.

Ill blows the wind that profits no body,
This man whom hand to hand I slew in fight,
May be possessed with some store of Crowns,
And I that (happily) take them from him now,
May yet (ere night) yield both my Life and them
To some man else, as this dead man does me.
Who Is this? Oh God! It is my Fathers face,
Whom in this Conflict, I (unawares) have killed:
Oh heavy times! begetting such Events.
From London, by the King was I pressed forth,
My Father being the Earl of Warwickes man,
Came on the part of York, pressed by his Master:
And I, who at his hands received my life,
Have by my hands, of Life bereaved him.
Pardon me God, I knew not what I did:
And pardon Father, for I knew not thee.
My Tears shall wipe away these bloody marks:
And no more words, till they have flowed their fill.

O pitteous spectacle! O bloody Times!
Whiles Lions War, and battle for their Dens,
Poor harmless Lambs abide their enmity.
Weep wretched man: I Will aid thee Tear for Tear,
And let our hearts and eyes, like Civil War,
Be blind with tears, and break ore-charg'd with grief

Thou that so stoutly has resisted me,
Give me thy Gold, if thou have any Gold:
For I have bought it with an hundred blows.
But let me see: Is this our Foe-mans face?
Ah, no, no, no, it is mine only Son.
Ah Boy, if any life be left in thee,
Throw up thine eye: see, see, what showers arise,
Blown with the windy Tempest of my heart,
Upon thy wounds, that killes mine Eye, and Heart,
O pity God, this miserable Age!
What Stragems? how fell? how Butcherly?
Erreoneous, mutinous, and unnatural,
This deadly quarrel daily does beget?
O Boy! thy Father gave thee life too soon,
And has bereft thee of thy life too late.

Woe above woe: grief, more the^ common grief
O that my death would stay these ruthful deeds:
O pity, pity, gentle heaven pity:
The Red Rose and the White are on his face,
The fatal Colors of our striving Houses:
The one, his purple Blood right well resembles,
The other his pale Cheeks (me thinks) presents:
Wither one Rose, and let the other flourish:
If you contend, a thousand lives must wither.

How will my Mother, for a Fathers death
Take on with me, and never be satisfied?

How will my Wife, for slaughter of my Son,
Shed seas of Tears, and never be satisfied?

How will the Country, for these woeful chances,
Mis-thinke the King, and not be satisfied?

Was ever son, so rew'd a Fathers death?


Was ever Father so bemoaned his Son?


Was ever King so grieved for Subjects woe?
Much is your sorrow; Mine, ten times so much.

I Will bear thee hence, where I may weep my fill.


These arms of mine shall be thy winding sheet:
My heart (sweet Boy) shall be thy Sepulcher,
For from my heart, thine Image never shall go.
My sighing breast, shall be thy Funeral bell;
And so obsequious will thy Father be,
Men for the loss of thee, having no more,
As Priam was for all his Valiant Sons,
I Will bear thee hence, and let them fight that will,
For I have murdered where I should not kill.

Sad-hearted-men, much ouergone with Care;
Here sits a King, more woeful then you are.

Fly Father, fly: for all your Friends are fled.
And Warwick rages like a chafed Bull:
Away, for death does hold us in pursuit.

Mount you my Lord, toward Barwicke post amain:
Edward and Richard like a brace of Greyhounds,
Having the fearful flying Hare in sight,
With fiery eyes, sparkling for very wrath,
And bloody steel graspt in their yrefull hands
Are at our backs, and therefore hence amain.

Away: for vengeance comes along with them.
Nay, stay not to expostulate, make speed,
Or else come after, I Will away before.

Nay take me with thee, good sweet Exeter:
Not that I fear to stay, but love to go
Whether the Queen intends. Forward, away.

Here burns my Candle out; I, here it dies,
Which whiles it lasted, gave King Henry light.
O Lancaster! I fear thy overthrow,
More then my Bodies parting with my Soul:
My Love and Fear, glew'd many Friends to thee,
And now I fall. Thy tough Commixtures melts,
Impairing Henry, strengthening misproud York;
And whether fly the Gnats, but to the Sun?
And who shines now, but Henry's Enemies?
O Phoebus! had thou never given consent,
That Phaeton should check thy fiery Steeds,
Thy burning Carre never had scorched the earth.
And Henry, had thou swayed as Kings should do,
Or as thy Father, and his Father did,
Giving no ground unto the house of York,
They never then had sprung like Summer Flies:
I, and ten thousand in this lucklesse Realm,
Head left no mourning Widows for our death,
And thou this day, had kept thy Chair in peace.
For what does cherrish Weeds, but gentle air?
And what makes Robbers bold, but too much lenity?
Bootlesse are Plaints, and Curelesse are my Wounds:
No way to fly, nor strength to hold out flight:
The Foe is merciless, and will not pity:
For at their hands I have deserved no pity.
The air has got into my deadly Wounds,
And much effuse of blood, does make me faint:
Come York, and Richard, Warwick, and the rest,
I stabbed your Fathers bosoms; Split my breast.

Now breath we Lords, good fortune bids us pause,
And smooth the frowns of War, with peaceful looks:
Some Troops pursue the bloody-minded Queen,
That led calm Henry, though he were a King,
As does a Sail, filled with a fretting Gust
Command an Argosie to stem the Waves.
But think you (Lords) that Clifford fled with them?

No, it is impossible he should escape:
(For though before his face I speak the words)
Your Brother Richard marked him for the Grave.
And wheresoere he is, he is surely dead.

Whose soul is that which takes her heavy leave?
A deadly groan, like life and deaths departing.
See who it is.

And now the Battles ended,
If Friend or Foe, let him be gently used.

Revoke that doom of mercy, for it is Clifford,
Who not contented that he lopped the Branch
In hewing Rutland, when his leaves put forth,
But set his murdering knife unto the Root,
From whence that tender spray did sweetly spring,
I mean our Princely Father, Duke of York.

From off the gates of York, fetch down ye head,
Your Fathers head, which Clifford placed there:
In stead whereof, let this supply the room,
Measure for measure, must be answered.

Bring forth that fatal Schreechowle to our house,
That nothing sung but death, to us and ours:
Now death shall stop his dismal threatening sound,
And his ill-boading tongue, no more shall speak.

I think is understanding is bereft:
Speak Clifford, do thou know who speaks to thee?
Dark cloudy death ore-shades his beams of life,
And he nor sees, nor hears us, what we say.

O would he did, and so (perhaps) he does,
It Is but his policy to counterfeit,
Because he would avoid such bitter taunts
Which in the time of death he gave our Father.

If so thou think,
Vex him with eager Words.

Clifford, ask mercy, and obtain no grace.


Clifford, repent in bootlesse penitence.


Clifford, devise excuses for thy faults,


While we devise fell Tortures for thy faults.


Thou didd'st love York, and I am son to York.


Thou pittied'st Rutland, I will pity thee.


Where Is Captain Margaret, to fence you now?


They mock thee Clifford,
Swear as thou was it wont.

What, not an Oath? Nay then the world go's hard
When Clifford cannot spare his Friends an oath:
I know by that he is dead, and by my Soul,
If this right hand would buy two hours life,
That I (in all despite) might rail at him,
This hand should chop it off: and with the issuing Blood
Stifle the Villain, whose vnstanched thirst
York, and young Rutland could not satisfy

I, but he is dead. Of with the Traitors head,
And rear it in the place your Fathers stands.
And now to London with Triumphant march,
There to be crowned Englands Royal King:
From whence, shall Warwick cut the Sea to France,
And ask the Lady Bona for thy Queen:
So shall thou sinow both these Lands together,
And having France thy Friend, thou shall not dread
The scattred Foe, that hopes to rise again:
For though they cannot greatly sting to hurt,
Yet look to have them buz to offend thine ears:
First, will I see the Coronation,
And then to Britanny I Will cross the Sea,
To effect this marriage, so it please my Lord.

Even as thou will sweet Warwick, let it be:
For in thy shoulder do I build my Seat;
And never will I undertake the thing
Wherein thy counsel and consent is wanting:
Richard, I will create thee Duke of Gloucester,
And George of Clarence; Warwick as our Self,
Shall do, and undo as him pleases best.

Let me be Duke of Clarence, George of Gloucester,
For Glosters Dukedom is too ominous.

Tut, that is a foolish observation:
Richard* be Duke of Gloucester: Now to London,
To see these Honors in possession.

Under this thick grown brake, we will shroud our selves:
For through this Laund anon the Dear will come,
And in this covert will we make our Stand,
Culling the principal of all the Dear.

I Will stay above the hill, so both may shoot.


That cannot be, the noise of thy Crosse-bow
Will scarre the Heard, and so my shoot is lost:
Here stand we both, and aim we at the best:
And for the time shall not seem tedious,
I Will tell thee what befell me on a day,
In this selfe-place, where now we mean to stand.

Here comes a man, let us stay till he be past:


From Scotland am I stolen even of pure love,
To greet mine own Land with my wishfull sight:
No Harry, Harry, it is no Land of thine,
Thy place is filled, thy Scepter wrung from thee,
Thy Balm washed off, wherewith thou was Anointed:
No bending knee will call thee Caesar now,
No humble suitors prease to speak for right:
No, not a man comes for redress of thee:
For how can I help them, and not my self?

I, here is a Dear, whose skin's a Keepers Fee:
This is the quondam King; Let Us seize upon him.

Let me embrace the sower Adversaries,
For Wise men say, it is the wisest course.

Why linger we? Let us lay hands upon him.


Forbear awhile, we will hear a little more.


My Queen and Son are gone to France for aid:
And (as I hear) the great Commanding Warwick
I: thither gone, to crave the French Kings Sister
To wife for Edward. If this news be true,
Poor Queen, and Son, your labor is but lost:
For Warwick is a subtle Orator:
And Lewis a Prince soon won with moving words:
By this account then, Margaret may win him,
For she is a woman to be pitied much:
Her sighs will make a batt'ry in his breast,
Her tears will pierce into a Marble heart:
The Tiger will be mild, whiles she does mourn;
And Nero will be tainted with remorse,
To hear and see her plaints, her Brinish Tears.
I, but she is come to beg, Warwick to give:
She on his left side, craving aid for Henry;
He on his right, asking a wife for Edward.
She Weeps, and says, her Henry is deposed:
He Smiles, and says, his Edward is instaul'd;
That she (poor Wretch) for grief can speak no more:
Whiles Warwick tells his Title, smooths the Wrong,
Infers arguments of mighty strength,
And in conclusion winnes the King from her,
With promise of his Sister, and what else,
To strengthen and support King Edwards place.
O Margaret, thus 'twill be, and thou (poor soul)
Art then forsaken, as thou went forlorn.

Say, what art thou talk of Kings and Queens?


More then I seem, and less then I was born to:
A man at least, for less I should not be:
And men may talk of Kings, and why not I?

I, but thou talk, as if thou were a King.


Why so I am (in Mind) and that is enough.


But if thou be a King, where is thy Crown?


My Crown is in my heart, not on my head:
Not decked with Diamonds, and Indian stones:
Nor to be seen: my Crown, is called Content,
A Crown it is, that sildome Kings enjoy.

Well, if you be a King crowned with Content,
Your Crown Content, and you, must be contented
To go along with us. For (as we think)
You are the king King Edward has deposed:
And we his subjects, sworn in all Allegiance,
Will apprehend you, as his Enemy.

But did you never swear, and break an Oath.


No, never such an Oath, nor will not now.


Where did you dwell when I was K. of England?


Here in this Country, where we now remain.


I was anointed King at nine months old,
My Father, and my Grandfather were Kings:
And you were sworn true Subjects unto me:
And tell me then, have you not broke your Oaths?

No, for we were Subjects, but while you were king


Why? Am I dead? Do I not breath a Man?
Ah simple men, you know not what you swear:
Look, as I blow this Feather from my Face,
And as the Air blows it to me again,
Obeying with my wind when I do blow,
And yielding to another, when it blows,
Commanded always by the greater gust:
Such is the lightness of you, common men.
But do not break your Oaths, for of that sin,
My mild entreaty shall not make you guilty.
Go where you will, the king shall be commanded,
And be you kings, command, and I Will obey.

We are true Subjects to the king, King Edward.


So would you be again to Henry,
If he were seated as king Edward is.

We charge you in Gods name and the Kings,
To go with us unto the Officers.

In Gods name lead, your Kings name be obeyed,
And what God will, that let your King perform*
And what he will, I humbly yield unto.

Brother of Gloucester, at S. Albons field
This Ladies Husband, Sir Richard Gray, was slain,
His Land then seized on by the Conqueror,
Her suit is now, to repossesse those Lands,
Which we in Justice cannot well deny,
Because in Quarrel of the House of York,
The worthy Gentleman did lose his Life.

Your Highness shall do well to grant her suit:
It were dishonor to deny it her.

It were no less, but yet I Will make a pawse.


Yea, is it so:
I see the Lady has a thing to grant,
Before the King will grant her humble suit.

He knows the Game, how true he keeps the wind?


Silence.


Widow, we will consider of your suit,
And come some other time to know our mind.

Right gracious Lord, I cannot brook delay:
May it please your Highness to resolve me now,
And what your pleasure is, shall satisfy me.

I Widow? then I Will warrant you all your Lands,
And if what pleases him, shall pleasure you:
Fight closer, or good faith you will catch a Blow.

I fear her not, unless she chance to fall.


God forbid that, for he will take vantages.


How many Children have thou, Widow? tell me.


I think he means to beg a Child of her.


Nay then whip me: he will rather give her two.


Three, my most gracious Lord.


You shall have four, if you will be ruled by him.


'Twere pity they should lose their Fathers Lands.


Be pitiful, dread Lord, and grant it then.


Lords give us leave, I Will try this Widows wit.


I, good leave have you, for you will have leave,
Till Youth take leave, and leave you to the Crutch.

Now tell me, Madame, do you love your Children?


I, full as dearly as I love my self.


And would you not do much to do them good?


To do them good, I would sustain some harm.


Then get your Husbands Lands, to do them good.


Therefore I came unto your Majesty.


I Will tell you how these Lands are to be got.


So shall you bind me to your Highness service.


What service will thou do me, if I give them?


What you command, that rests in me to do.


But you will take exceptions to my Boon.


No, gracious Lord, except I cannot do it.


I, but thou can do what I mean to ask.


Why then I will do what your Grace commands.


He plyes her hard, and much Rain wears the Marble.


As red as fire? nay then, her Wax must melt.


Why stoppes my Lord? shall I not hear my Task?


An easy Task, it is but to love a King.


That Is soon performed, because I am a Subject.


Why then, thy Husbands Lands I freely give thee.


I take my leave with many thousand thanks.


The Match is made, she seals it with a Cursie.


But stay thee, it is the fruits of love I mean.


The fruits of Love, I mean, my loving Liege.


I, but I fear me in another sense.
What Love, think thou, I sue so much to get?

My love till death, my humble thanks, my prayers,
That love which Virtue begges, and Virtue graunts.

No, by my troth, I did not mean such love.


Why then you mean not, as I thought you did.


But now you partly may perceive my mind.


My mind will never grant what I perceive
Your Highness aims at, if I aim aright.

To tell thee plain, I aim to lie with thee.


To tell you plain, I had rather lie in Prison.


Why then thou shall not have thy Husbands Lands.


Why then mine Honesty shall be my Dower,
For by that loss, I will not purchase them.

Therein thou wrong'st thy Children mightily.


Herein your Highness wrongs both them and me:
But mighty Lord, this merry inclination
Accords not with the sadness of my suit:
Please you dismiss me, either with I, or no.

I, if thou will say I to my request:
No, if thou do say No to my demand.

Then No, my Lord: my suit is at an end.


The Widow likes him not, she knits her Brows.


He is the bluntest Wooer in Christendom.


Her Looks does argue her replete with Modesty,
Her Words does show her Wit incomparable,
All her perfections challenge Sovereignty,
One way, or other, she is for a King,
And she shall be my Love, or else my Queen.
Say, that King Edward take thee for his Queen?

It Is better said then done, my gracious Lord:
I am a subject fit to jest withal,
But far unfit to be a Sovereign.

Sweet Widow, by my State I swear to thee,
I speak no more then what my Soul intends,
And that is, to enjoy thee for my Love.

And that is more then I will yield unto:
I know, I am too mean to be your Queen,
And yet too good to be your Concubine.

You cavil, Widow, I did mean my Queen.


'Twill grieve your Grace, my Sons should call you Father.


No more, then when my Daughters
Call thee Mother.
Thou art a Widow, and thou have some Children,
And by Gods Mother, I being but a Bachelor,
Have other-some. Why, it is a happy thing,
To be the Father unto many Sons:
Answer no more, for thou shall be my Queen.

The Ghostly Father now has done his Shrift.


When he was made a Shriuer, 'twas for shift.


Brothers, you muse what Chat we two have had.


The Widow likes it not, for she looks very sad.


You Would think it strange, if I should marry her.


To who, my Lord?


Why Clarence, to my self.


That would be ten days wonder at the least.


That Is a day longer then a Wonder lasts.


By so much is the Wonder in extremes.


Well, jest on Brothers: I can tell you both,
Her suit is granted for her Husbands Lands.

My gracious Lord, Henry your Foe is taken,
And brought your Prisoner to your Palace Gate.

See that he be conuey'd unto the Tower:
And go we Brothers to the man that took him,
To question of his apprehension.
Widow go you along: Lords use her honorable.

I, Edward will use Women honorably:
Would he were wasted, Marrow, Bones, and all,
That from his Loins no hopeful Branch may spring,
To cross me from the Golden time I look for:
And yet, between my Souls desire, and me,
The lustful Edwards Title buried,
Is Clarence, Henry, and his Son young Edward,
And all the vnlook'd-for Issue of their Bodies,
To take their Rooms, ere I can place my self:
A cold premeditation for my purpose.
Why then I do but dream on Sovereignty,
Like one that stands upon a Promontorie,
And spies a farre-off shore, where he would tread,
Wishing his foot were equal with his eye,
And chides the Sea, that sunders him from thence,
Saying he will lade it dry, to have his way:
So do I wish the Crown, being so far off,
And so I chide the means that keeps me from it,
And so (I say) I Will cut the Causes off,
Flattering me with impossibilities:
My Eyes too quick, my Heart o're-weenes too much,
Unless my Hand and Strength could equal them.
Well, say there is no Kingdom then for Richard:
What other Pleasure can the World afford?
I Will make my Heaven in a Ladies Lap,
And deck my Body in gay Ornaments,
And 'witch sweet Ladies with my Words and Looks.
Oh miserable Thought! and more unlikely*
Then to accomplish twenty Golden Crowns.
Why Love forswore me in my Mothers Womb:
And for I should not deal in her soft Laws,
She did corrupt frail Nature with some Bribe,
To shrink mine Arm up like a withered Shrub,
To make an envious Mountain on my Back,
Where sits Deformity to mock my Body;
To shape my Legs of an unequal size,
To dis-proportion me in every part:
Like to a Chaos, or an vn-lick'd Beare-whelpe,
That carries no impression like the Damme.
And am I then a man to be beloved?
Oh monstrous fault, to harbor such a thought.
Then since this Earth affoords no Joy to me,
But to command, to check, to o're-beare such,
As are of better Person then my self:
I Will make my Heaven, to dream upon the Crown,
And whiles I live, t'account this World but Hell,
Until my mis-shap'd Trunk, that bears this Head,
Be round impaled with a glorious Crown.
And yet I know not how to get the Crown,
For many Lives stand between me and home:
And I, like one lost in a Thornie Wood,
That rents the Thorns, and is rent with the Thorns,
Seeking a way, and straying from the way,
Not knowing how to find the open Air,
But toyling desperately to find it out,
Torment my self, to catch the English Crown:
And from that torment I will free my self,
Or hew my way out with a bloody Axe.
Why I can smile, and murder whiles I smile,
And cry, Content, to that which grieves my Heart,
And wet my Cheeks with artificial Tears,
And frame my Face to all occasions.
I Will drown more Sailors then the Mermaid shall,
I Will slay more gazers then the Basiliske,
I Will play the Orator as well as Nestor,
Deceive more slyly then Ulysses could,
And like a Synon, take another Troy.
I can add Colors to the Camelion,
Change shapes with Proteus, for advantages,
And set the murtherous Macheuill to School.
Can I do this, and cannot get a Crown?
Tut, were it farther off, I Will pluck it down.

Fair Queen of England, worthy Margaret,
Sit down with us: it ill befits thy State,
And Birth, that thou should stand, while Lewis does sit.

No, mighty King of France: now Margaret
Must strike her sail, and learn a while to serve,
Where Kings command. I was (I must confess)
Great Albions Queen, in former Golden days:
But now mischance has trod my Title down,
And with dishonor laid me on the ground,
Where I must take like Seat unto my fortune,
And to my humble Seat conform my self.

Why say, fair Queen, whence springs this deep despair?


From such a cause, as fills mine eyes with tears,
And stops my tongue, while heart is drowned in cares.

What ere it be, be thou still like thy self,
And sit thee by our side.
Yield not thy neck to Fortunes yoke,
But let thy dauntlesse mind still ride in triumph,
Over all mischance.
Be plain, Queen Margaret, and tell thy grief,
It shall be eased, if France can yield relief.

Those gracious words
Revive my drooping thoughts,
And give my tongue-ty'd sorrows leave to speak.
Now therefore be it known to Noble Lewis,
That Henry, sole possessor of my Love,
Is, of a King, become a banished man,
And forced to live in Scotland a Forlorn;
While proud ambitious Edward, Duke of York,
Usurps the Regal Title, and the Seat
Of Englands true anointed lawful King.
This is the cause that I, poor Margaret,
With this my Son, Prince Edward, Henry's Heir,
Am come to crave thy just and lawful aid:
And if thou fail us, all our hope is done.
Scotland has will to help, but cannot help:
Our People, and our Peers, are both misled,
Our Treasure seized, our Soldiers put to flight,
And (as thou see) our selves in heavy plight.

Renowned Queen,
With patience calm the Storm,
While we bethink a means to break it off.

The more we stay, the stronger grows our Foe.


The more I stay, the more I Will succor thee.


O, but impatience waits on true sorrow.
And see where comes the breeder of my sorrow.

What Is he approaches boldly to our presence?


Our Earl of Warwick, Edwards greatest Friend.


Welcome brave Warwick, what brings thee to France?


I now begins a second Storm to rise,
For this is he that moves both Wind and Tide.

From worthy Edward, King of Albion,
My Lord and Sovereign, and thy vowed Friend,
I come (in Kindness, and unfeigned Love)
First, to do greetings to thy Royal Person,
And then to crave a League of Amity:
And lastly, to confirm that Amity
With Nuptial Knot, if thou vouchsafe to grant
That virtuous Lady Bona, thy fair Sister,
To Englands King, in lawful Marriage.

If that go forward, Henry's hope is done.


And gracious Madame,
In our Kings behalf,
I am commanded, with your leave and favor,
Humbly to kiss your Hand, and with my Tongue
To tell the passion of my Sovereigns Heart;
Where Fame, late entering at his heedfull Ears,
Has placed thy Beauties Image, and thy Virtue.

King Lewis, and Lady Bona, hear me speak,
Before you answer Warwick. His demand
Springs not from Edwards well-meant honest Love,
But from Deceit, bred by Necessity:
For how can Tyrants safely govern home,
Unless abroad they purchase great alliance?
To prove him Tyrant, this reason may suffice,
That Henry lives still: but were he dead,
Yet here Prince Edward stands, King Henry's Son.
Look therefore Lewis, that by this League and Marriage
Thou draw not on thy Danger, and Dishonor:
For though Usurpers sway the rule a while,
Yet Heavens are just, and Time suppresseth Wrongs.

Injurious Margaret.


And why not Queen?


Because thy Father Henry did usurp,
And thou no more art Prince, then she is Queen.

Then Warwick disanulls great John of Gaunt,
Which did subdue the greatest part of Spain;
And after John of Gaunt, Henry the Fourth,
Whose Wisdom was a Mirror to the wisest:
And after that wise Prince, Henry the Fifth,
Who by his Prowess conquered all France:
From th^se, our Henry lineally descends.

Oxford, how haps it in this smooth discourse,
You told not, how Henry the Sixth has lost
All that, which Henry the Fifth had gotten:
Me thinks these Peers of France should smile at that.
But for the rest: you tell a Pedigree
Of threescore and two years, a silly time
To make prescription for a Kingdoms worth.

Why Warwick, can thou speak against thy Liege,
Whom thou obeyd'st thirty and six years,
And not bewray thy Treason with a Blush?

Can Oxford, that did ever fence the right,
Now buckler Falsehood with a Pedigree?
For shame leave Henry, and call Edward King.

Call him my King, by whose injurious doom
My elder Brother, the Lord Aubrey Vere
Was done to death? and more then so, my Father,
Even in the downe-fall of his mellow'd years,
When Nature brought him to the door of Death?
No Warwick, no: while Life vpholds this Arm,
This Arm vpholds the House of Lancaster.

And I the House of York.


Queen Margaret, Prince Edward, and Oxford,
Vouchsafe at our request, to stand aside,
While I use further conference with Warwick.

Heavens grant, that Warwickes words bewitch him not.


Now Warwick, tell me even upon thy conscience
Is Edward your true King? for I were loath
To link with him, that were not lawful chosen.

Thereon I pawn my Credit, and mine Honor.


But is he gracious in the Peoples eye?


The more, that Henry was unfortunate.


Then further: all dissembling set aside,
Tell me for truth, the measure of his Love
Unto our Sister Bona.

Such it seems,
As may beseem a Monarch like himself.
My self have often heard him say, and swear,
That this his Love was an external Plant,
Whereof the Root was fixed in Virtues ground,
The Leaves and Fruit maintained with Beauties Sun,
Exempt from Envy, but not from Disdain,
Unless the Lady Bona quit his pain.

Now Sister, let us hear your firm resolve.


Your grant, or your denial, shall be mine.
Yet I confess, that often ere this day,
When I have heard your Kings desert recounted,
Mine ear has tempted judgment to desire.

Then Warwick, thus:
Our Sister shall be Edwards.
And now forthwith shall Articles be drawn,
Touching the Ioynture that your King must make,
Which with her Dowry shall be counter-poys'd:
Draw near, Queen Margaret, and be a witness,
That Bona shall be Wife to the English King.

To Edward, but not to the English King.


Deceitful Warwick, it was thy device,
By this alliance to make void my suit:
Before thy coming, Lewis was Henry's friend.

And still is friend to him, and Margaret.
But if your Title to the Crown be weak,
As may appear by Edwards good success:
Then it is but reason, that I be released
From giving aid, which late I promised.
Yet shall you have all kindness at my hand,
That your Estate requires, and mine can yield.

Henry now lives in Scotland, at his ease;
Where having nothing, nothing can he lose.
And as for you your self (our quondam Queen)
You have a Father able to maintain you,
And better 'twere, you troubled him, then France.

Peace impudent, and shameless Warwick,
Proud setter up, and puller down of Kings,
I will not hence, till with my Talk and Tears
(Both full of Truth) I make King Lewis behold
Thy slye conueyance, and thy Lords false love,
For both of you are Birds of selfsame Feather.

Warwick, this is some post to us, or thee.


My Lord Ambassador,
These Letters are for you.
Sent from your Brother Marquess Montague.
These from our King, unto your Majesty.
And Madam, these for you:
From whom, I know not.

I like it well, that our fair Queen and Mistress Smiles at her news, while
Warwick frowns at his


Nay mark how Lewis stampes as he were netled. I hope, all is for the best.


Warwick, what are thy News?
And yours, fair Queen.

Mine such, as fill my heart with vnhop'd joys.


Mine full of sorrow, and hearts discontent.


What? has your King married the Lady Gray?
And now to sooth your Forgery, and his,
Sends me a Paper to persuade me Patience?
Is this the Alliance that he seeks with France?
Dare he presume to scorn us in this manner?

I told your Majesty as much before:
This proves Edwards Love, and Warwickes honesty.

King Lewis, I here protest in sight of heaven,
And by the hope I have of heavenly bliss,
That I am clear from this misdeed of Edwards;
No more my King, for he dishonors me,
But most himself, if he could see his shame.
Did I forget, that by the House of York
My Father came untimely to his death?
Did I let pass the abuse done to my Niece?
Did I impale him with the Regal Crown?
Did I put Henry from his Native Right?
And am I guerdon'd at the last, with Shame?
Shame on himself, for my Desert is Honor.
And to repair my Honor lost for him,
I here renounce him, and return to Henry.
My Noble Queen, let former grudges pass,
And henceforth, I am thy true Seruitour:
I will revenge his wrong to Lady Bona,
And replant Henry in his former state.

Warwick,
These words have turned my Hate, to Love,
And I forgive, and quite forget old faults,
And joy that thou becom'st King Henry's Friend.

So much his Friend, I, his unfeigned Friend,
That if King Lewis vouchsafe to furnish us
With some few Bands of chosen Soldiers,
I Will undertake to Land them on our Coast,
And force the Tyrant from his seat by War.
It Is not his new-made Bride shall succor him,
And as for Clarence, as my Letters tell me,
He Is very likely now to fall from him,
For matching more for wanton Lust, then Honor,
Or then for strength and safety of our Country.

Dear Brother, how shall Bona be revenged,
But by thy help to this distressed Queen?

Renowned Prince, how shall Poor Henry live,
Unless thou rescue him from foul despair?

My quarrel, and this English Queens, are one.


And mine fair Lady Bona, ioynes with yours.


And mine, with hers, and thine, and Margarets.
Therefore, at last, I firmly am resolved
You shall have aid.

Let me give humble thanks for all, at once.


Then Englands Messenger, return in Post,
And tell false Edward, thy supposed King,
That Lewis of France, is sending over Maskers
To revel it with him, and his new Bride.
Thou see what is past, go fear thy King withal.

Tell him, in hope he will prove a widower shortly,
I wear the Willow Garland for his sake.

Tell him, my mourning weeds are laid aside,
And I am ready to put Armor on.

Tell him from me, that he has done me wrong,
And therefore I Will vn-Crowne him, er't be long.
There Is thy reward, be gone.

But Warwick,
Thou and Oxford, with five thousand men
Shall cross the Seas, and bid false Edward battle:
And as occasion serves, this Noble Queen
And Prince, shall follow with a fresh Supply.
Yet ere thou go, but answer me one doubt:
What Pledge have we of thy firm Loyalty?

This shall assure my constant Loyalty,
That if our Queen, and this young Prince agree,
I Will join mine eldest daughter, and my Joy,
To him forthwith, in holy Wedlock bands.

Yes, I agree, and thank you for your Motion.
Son Edward, she is Fair and Virtuous,
Therefore delay not, give thy hand to Warwick,
And with thy hand, thy faith irreuocable,
That only Warwickes daughter shall be thine.

Yes, I accept her, for she well deserves it,
And here to pledge my Vow, I give my hand.

Why stay we now? These soldiers shall be levied,
And thou Lord Bourbon, our High Admiral
Shall waft them over with our Royal Fleet.
I long till Edward fall by Wars mischance,
For mocking Marriage with a Dame of France.

I came from Edward as Ambassador,
But I return his sworn and mortal Foe:
Matter of Marriage was the charge he gave me,
But dreadful War shall answer his demand.
Had he none else to make a stale but me?
Then none but I, shall turn his Jest to Sorrow.
I was the Chief that raised him to the Crown,
And I Will be Chief to bring him down again:
Not that I pity Henry's misery,
But seek Revenge on Edwards mockery.

Now tell me Brother Clarence, what think you
Of this new Marriage with the Lady Gray?
Has not our Brother made a worthy choice?

Alas, you know, it is far from hence to France,
How could he stay till Warwick made return?

My Lords, forbear this talk: here comes the King.


And his well-chosen Bride.


I mind to tell him plainly what I think.


Now Brother of Clarence,
How like you our Choice,
That you stand pensive, as half malecontent?

As well as Lewis of France,
Or the Earl of Warwick,
Which are so weak of courage, and in judgment,
That they will take no offense at our abuse.

Suppose they take offense without a cause:
They are but Lewis and Warwick, I am Edward,
Your King and Warwickes, and must have my will.

And shall have your will, because our King:
Yet hasty Marriage seldom proves well.

Yea, Brother Richard, are you offended too?


Not I: no:
God forbid, that I should wish them seuer'd,
Whom God has joined together:
I, and 'twere pity, to sunder them,
That yoke so well together.

Setting your skornes, and your mislike aside,
Tell me some reason, why the Lady Gray
Should not become my Wife, and Englands Queen?
And you too, Somerset, and Mountague,
Speak freely what you think.

Then this is mine opinion:
That King Lewis becomes your Enemy,
For mocking him about the Marriage
Of the Lady Bona.

And Warwick, doing what you gave in charge,
Is now dis-honored by this new Marriage.

What, if both Lewis and Warwick be appeased,
By such invention as I can devise?

Yet, to have joined with France in such alliance,
Would more have strengthened this our Commonwealth
Against foreign storms, then any homebred Marriage.

Why, knows not Mountague, that of it self,
England is safe, if true within it self?

But the safer, when it is backed with France.


It Is better using France, then trusting France:
Let us be backed with God, and with the Seas,
Which he has given for fence impregnable,
And with their helps, only defend our selves:
In them, and in our selves, our safety lies.

For this one speech, Lord Hastings well deserves
To have the Heir of the Lord Hungerford.

I, what of that? it was my will, and grant,
And for this once, my Will shall stand for Law.

And yet me thinks, your Grace has not done well,
To give the Heir and Daughter of Lord Scales
Unto the Brother of your loving Bride;
She better would have fitted me, or Clarence:
But in your Bride you bury Brotherhood.

Or else you would not have bestowed the Heir
Of the Lord Bonuill on your new Wives Son,
And leave your Brothers to go speed elsewhere.

Alas, poor Clarence: is it for a Wife
That thou art malecontent? I will provide thee.

In choosing for your self,
You showed your judgment:
Which being shallow, you shall give me leave
To play the Broker in mine own behalf;
And to that end, I shortly mind to leave you.

Leave me, or tarry, Edward will be King,
And not be tied unto his Brothers will.

My Lords, before it pleased his Majesty
To raise my State to Title of a Queen,
Do me but right, and you must all confess,
That I was not ignoble of Descent,
And meaner then my self have had like fortune,
But as this Title honors me and mine,
So your dislikes, to whom I would be pleasing,
Does cloud my joys with danger, and with sorrow.

My Love, forbear to fawn upon their frowns:
What danger, or what sorrow can befall thee,
So long as Edward is thy constant friend,
And their true Sovereign, whom they must obey?
Nay, whom they shall obey, and love thee too,
Unless they seek for hatred at my hands:
Which if they do, yet will I keep thee safe,
And they shall feel the vengeance of my wrath.

I hear, yet say not much, but think the more.


Now Messenger, what Letters, or what News from France?


My Sovereign Liege, no Letters, and few words,
But such, as I (without your special pardon)
Dare not relate.

Go too, we pardon thee:
Therefore, in brief, tell me their words,
As near as thou can guess them.
What answer makes King Lewis unto our Letters?

At my depart, these were his very words:
Go tell false Edward, the supposed King,
That Lewis of France is sending over Maskers,
To revel it with him, and his new Bride.

Is Lewis so brave? belike he thinks me Henry.
But what said Lady Bona to my Marriage?

These were her words, vtt'red with mild disdain:
Tell him, in hope he will prove a Widower shortly,
I Will wear the Willow Garland for his sake.

I blame not her; she could say little less:
She had the wrong. But what said Henry's Queen?
For I have heard, that she was there in place.

Tell him (quoth she)
My mourning Weeds are done,
And I am ready to put Armor on.

Belike she minds to play the Amazon.
But what said Warwick to these injuries?

He, more incensed against your Majesty,
Then all the rest, discharged me with these words:
Tell him from me, that he has done me wrong,
And therefore I Will vncrowne him, er't be long.

Ha? durst the Traitor breath out so proud words?
Well, I will arm me, being thus fore-warned:
They shall have Wars, and pay for their presumption.
But say, is Warwick friends with Margaret?

I, gracious Sovereign,
They are so linked in friendship,
That young Prince Edward marryes Warwicks Daughter.

Belike, the elder;
Clarence will have the younger.
Now Brother King farewell, and sit you fast,
For I will hence to Warwickes other Daughter,
That though I want a Kingdom, yet in Marriage
I may not prove inferior to your self.
You that love me, and Warwick, follow me.

Not I:
My thoughts aim at a further matter:
I stay not for the love of Edward, but the Crown.

Clarence and Somerset both gone to Warwick?
Yet am I armed against the worst can happen:
And haste is needful in this desperate case.
Pembrooke and Stafford, you in our behalf
Go levy men, and make prepare for War;
They are already, or quickly will be landed:
My self in person will straight follow you.
But ere I go, Hastings and Mountague
Resolve my doubt: you twain, of all the rest,
Are near to Warwick, by blood, and by alliance:
Tell me, if you love Warwick more then me;
If it be so, then both depart to him:
I rather wish you foes, then hollow friends.
But if you mind to hold your true obedience,
Give me assurance with some friendly Vow,
That I may never have you in suspect.

So God help Mountague, as he proves true.


And Hastings, as he favors Edwards cause.


Now, Brother Richard, will you stand by us?


I, in despite of all that shall withstand you.


Why so: then am I sure of Victory.
Now therefore let us hence, and lose no hour,
Till we meet Warwick, with his foreign power.

Trust me, my Lord, all hitherto goes well,
The common people by numbers swarm to us.
But see where Somerset and Clarence comes:
Speak suddenly, my Lords, are we all friends?

Fear not that, my Lord.


Then gentle Clarence, welcome unto Warwick,
And welcome Somerset: I hold it cowardice,
To rest mistrustfull, where a Noble Heart
Has pawned an open Hand, in sign of Love;
Else might I think, that Clarence, Edwards Brother,
Were but a fained friend to our proceedings:
But welcome sweet Clarence, my Daughter shall be thine.
And now, what rests? but in Nights Couerture,
Thy Brother being carelessely encamped,
His Soldiers lurking in the Town about,
And but attended by a simple Guard,
We may surprise and take him at our pleasure,
Our Scouts have found the adventure very easy:
That as Ulysses, and stout Diomede,
With slight and manhood stole to Rhesus Tents,
And brought from thence the Thracian fatal Steeds;
So we, well covered with the Nights black Mantle,
At unawares may beat down Edwards Guard,
And seize himself: I say not, slaughter him,
For I intend but only to surprise him.
You that will follow me to this attempt,
Applaud the Name of Henry, with your Leader.
Why then, let us on our way in silent sort,
For Warwick and his friends, God and Saint George.

Come on my Masters, each man take his stand,
The King by this, is set him down to sleep.

What, will he not to Bed?


Why, no: for he has made a solemn Vow,
Never to lie and take his natural Rest,
Till Warwick, or himself, be quite suppressed.

To morrow then belike shall be the day,
If Warwick be so near as men report.

But say, I pray, what Noble man* is that,
That with the King here rests in his Tent?

It Is the Lord Hastings, the Kings chiefest friend.


O, is it so? but why commands the King,
That his chief followers lodge in Towns about him,
While he himself keeps in the cold field?

It Is the more honor, because more dangerous.


I, but give me worship, and quietness,
I like it better then a dangerous honor.
If Warwick knew in what estate he stands,
It Is to be doubted he would waken him.

Unless our Halberds did shut up his passage.


I: wherefore else guard we his Royal Tent,
But to defend his Person from Night-foes?

This is his Tent, and see where stand his Guard:
Courage my Masters: Honor now, or never:
But follow me, and Edward shall be ours.

Who goes there?


Stay, or thou dyest.


What are they that fly there?


Richard and Hastings: let them go, here is the Duke.


The Duke?
Why Warwick, when we parted,
Thou call'dst me King.

I, but the case is altered.
When you disgraced me in my Embassade,
Then I degraded you from being King,
And come now to create you Duke of York.
Alas, how should you govern any Kingdom,
That know not how to use Ambassadors,
Nor how to be contented with one Wife,
Nor how to use your Brothers Brotherly,
Nor how to study for the Peoples Welfare,
Nor how to shroud your self from Enemies?

Yea, Brother of Clarence,
Art thou here too?
Nay then I see, that Edward needs must down.
Yet Warwick, in despite of all mischance,
Of thee thy self, and all thy Accomplices,
Edward will always bear himself as King:
Though Fortunes malice overthrow my State,
My mind exceedes the compass of her Wheel.

Then for his mind, be Edward Englands King;
But Henry now shall wear the English Crown,
And be true King indeed: thou but the shadow.
My Lord of Somerset, at my request,
See that forthwith Duke Edward be conuey'd
Unto my Brother Archbishop of York:
When I have fought with Pembrooke, and his fellows,
I Will follow you, and tell what answer
Lewis and the Lady Bona send to him.
Now for awhile farewell good Duke of York.

What Fates impose, that men must needs abide;
It boots not to resist both wind and tide.

What now remains my Lords for us to do,
But march to London with our Soldiers?

I, that is the first thing that we have to do,
To free King Henry from imprisonment,
And see him seated in the Regal Throne.

Madam, what makes you in this sudden change?


Why Brother Rivers, are you yet to learn
What late misfortune is befalne King Edward?

What loss of some pitched battle
Against Warwick?

No, but the loss of his own Royal person.


Then is my Sovereign slain?


I almost slain, for he is taken prisoner,
Either betrayed by falsehood of his Guard,
Or by his Foe surpised at unawares:
And as I further have to understand,
Is new committed to the Bishop of York,
Fell Warwickes Brother, and by that our Foe.

These News I must confess are full of grief,
Yet gracious Madam, bear it as you may,
Warwick may loose, that now has won the day.

Till then, fair hope must hinder lives decay:
And I the rather waine me from despair
For love of Edwards Offspring in my womb:
This is it that makes me bridle passion,
And bear with Mildness my misfortunes cross:
I, I, for this I draw in many a tear,
And stop the rising of blood-sucking sighs,
Least with my sighs or tears, I blast or drown
King Edwards Fruit, true heir to the English Crown.

But Madam,
Where is Warwick then become?

I am informed that he comes toward London,
To set the Crown once more on Henry's head,
Guess thou the rest, King Edwards Friends must down.
But to prevent the Tyrants violence,
(For trust not him that has once broken Faith)
I Will hence forthwith unto the Sanctuary,
To save (at least) the heir of Edwards right:
There shall I rest secure from force and fraud:
Come therefore let us fly, while we may fly,
If Warwick take us, we are sure to dye.

Now my Lord Hastings, and Sir William Stanley
Leave off to wonder why I drew you hither,
Into this cheifest Thicket of the Park.
Thus stand the case: you know our King, my Brother,
Is prisoner to the Bishop here, at whose hands
He has good usage, and great liberty,
And often but attended with weak guard,
Come hunting this way to disport himself.
I have aduertis'd him by secret means,
That if about this hour he make this way,
Under the color of his usual game,
He shall here find his Friends with Horse and Men,
To set him free from his Captivity.

This way my Lord,
For this way lies the Game.

Nay this way man,
See where the Huntsmen stand.
Now Brother of Gloucester, Lord Hastings, and the rest,
Stand you thus close to steal the Bishops Dear?

Brother, the time and case, requires have,
Your horse stands ready at the Parke-corner.

But whether shall we then?


To Lyn my Lord,
And shipped from thence to Flanders.

Well guest believe me, for that was my meaning


Stanley, I will requite thy forwardness.


But wherefore stay we? it is no time to talk.


Huntsman, what say thou?
Will thou go along?

Better do so, then tarry and be hanged.


Come then away, lets ha no more adoo.


Bishop farewell,
Sheeld thee from Warwickes frown,
And pray that I may re-possesse the Crown.

M. Lieutenant, now that God and Friends
Have shaken Edward from the Regal seat,
And turned my captive state to liberty,
My fear to hope, my sorrows unto joys,
At our enlargement what are thy due Fees?

Subjects may challenge nothing of their Sou'rains
But, if an humble prayer may prevail,
I then crave pardon of your Majesty.

For what, Lieutenant? For well using me?
Nay, be thou sure, I Will well requite thy kindness.
For that it made my imprisonment, a pleasure:
I, such a pleasure, as incaged Birds
Conceive; when after many moody Thoughts,
At last, by Notes of Household harmony,
They quite forget their loss of Liberty.
But Warwick, after God, thou set'st me free,
And chiefly therefore, I thank God, and thee,
He was the Author, thou the Instrument.
Therefore that I may conquer Fortunes spite,
By living low, where Fortune cannot hurt me,
And that the people of this blessed Land
May not be punished with my thwarting stars,
Warwick, although my Head still wear the Crown,
I here resign my Government to thee,
For thou art fortunate in all thy deeds.

Your Grace has still been famed for virtuous,
And now may seem as wise as virtuous,
By spying and avoiding Fortunes malice,
For few men rightly temper with the Stars:
Yet in this one thing let me blame your Grace,
For choosing me, when Clarence is in place.

No Warwick, thou art worthy of the sway,
To whom the Heavens in thy Nativity,
Adiudg'd an Olive Branch, and Laurel Crown,
As likely to be blessed in Peace and War:
And therefore I yield thee my free consent.

And I choose Clarence only for Protector.


Warwick and Clarence, give me both your Hands:
Now join your Hands, and with your Hands your Hearts,
That no dissension hinder Government.
I make you both Protectors of this Land,
While I my self will lead a private Life,
And in devotion spend my latter days,
To sins rebuke, and my Creators praise.

What answers Clarence to his Sovereigns will?


That he consents, if Warwick yield consent,
For on thy fortune I repose my self.

Why then, though loath, yet must I be content:
We Will yoke together, like a double shadow
To Henry's Body, and supply his place;
I mean, in bearing weight of Government,
While he enioyes the Honor, and his ease.
And Clarence, now then it is more then needful,
Forthwith that Edward be pronounced a Traitor,
And all his Lands and Goods confiscate.

What else? and that Succession be determined.


I, therein Clarence shall not want his part.


But with the first, of all your chief affairs,
Let me entreat (for I command no more)
That Margaret your Queen, and my Son Edward,
Be sent for, to return from France with speed:
For till I see them here, by doubtful fear,
My joy of liberty is half eclipsed.

It shall be done, my Sovereign, with all speed.


My Lord of Somerset, what Youth is that,
Of whom you seem to have so tender care?

My Liege, it is young Henry, Earl of Richmond.


Come hither, Englands Hope:
If secret Powers suggest but truth
To my divining thoughts,
This pretty Lad will prove our Countries bliss.
His Looks are full of peaceful Majesty,
His Head by nature framed to wear a Crown,
His Hand to wield a Scepter, and himself
Likely in time to bless a Regal Throne:
Make much of him, my Lords; for this is he
Must help you more, then you are hurt by me.

What news, my friend?


That Edward is escaped from your Brother,
And fled (as he hears since) to Burgundy.

Unsavory news: but how made he escape?


He was conuey'd by Richard, Duke of Gloucester,
And the Lord Hastings, who attended him
In secret ambush, on the Forest side,
And from the Bishops Huntsmen rescued him:
For Hunting was his daily Exercise.

My Brother was too careless of his charge.
But let us hence, my Sovereign, to provide
A salve for any sore, that may betide.

My Lord, I like not of this flight of Edwards:
For doubtless, Burgundy will yield him help,
And we shall have more Wars befor't be long.
As Henry's late presaging Prophecy
Did glad my heart, with hope of this young Richmond:
So does my heart mis-giue me, in these Conflicts,
What may befall him, to his harm and ours.
Therefore, Lord Oxford, to prevent the worst,
Forthwith we will send him hence to Brittanie,
Till storms be past of Civil Enmity.

I: for if Edward re-possesse the Crown,
It Is like that Richmond, with the rest, shall down.

It shall be so: he shall to Brittanie.
Come therefore, let us about it speedily.

Now Brother Richard, Lord Hastings, and the rest,
Yet thus far Fortune makes us amends,
And says, that once more I shall enterchange
My wained state, for Henry's Regal Crown.
Well have we passed, and now re-pass'd the Seas,
And brought desired help from Burgundy.
What then remains, we being thus arrived
From Rauenspurre Haven, before the Gates of York,
But that we enter, as into our Dukedom?

The Gates made fast?
Brother, I like not this.
For many men that stumble at the Threshold,
Are well foretold, that danger lurkes within.

Tush man, aboadments must not now affright us:
By fair or foul means we must enter in,
For hither will our friends repair to us.

My Liege, I Will knock once more, to summon them.


My Lords,
We were forewarned of your coming,
And shut the Gates, for safety of our selves;
For now we owe allegiance unto Henry.

But, Master Mayor, if Henry be your King,
Yet Edward, at the least, is Duke of York.

True, my good Lord, I know you for no less.


Why, and I challenge nothing but my Dukedom,
As being well content with that alone.

But when the Fox has once got in his Nose,
He Will soon find means to make the Body follow.

Why, Master Mayor, why stand you in a doubt?
Open the Gates, we are King Henry's friends.

I, say you so? the Gates shall then be opened.


A wise stout Captain, and soon persuaded.


The good old man would feign that all were well,
So 'twere not long of him: but being entered,
I doubt not I, but we shall soon persuade
Both him, and all his Brothers, unto reason.

So, Master Mayor: these Gates must not be shut,
But in the Night, or in the time of War.
What, fear not man, but yield me up the Keys,
For Edward will defend the Town, and thee,
And all those friends, that deine to follow me.

Brother, this is Sir John Mountgomerie,
Our trusty friend, unless I be deceived.

Welcome Sir John: but why come you in Arms?


To help King Edward in his time of storm,
As every loyal Subject ought to do.

Thanks good Mountgomerie:
But we now forget our Title to the Crown,
And only claim our Dukedom,
Till God please to send the rest.

Then fare you well, for I will hence again,
I came to serve a King, and not a Duke:
Drummer strike up, and let us march away.

Nay stay, Sir John, a while, and we will debate
By what safe means the Crown may be recouer'd.

What talk you of debating? in few words,
If you will not here proclaim your self our King,
I Will leave you to your fortune, and be gone,
To keep them back, that come to succor you.
Why shall we fight, if you pretend no Title?

Why Brother, wherefore stand you on nice points?


When we grow stronger,
Then we will make our Claim:
Till then, it is wisdom to conceal our meaning.

Away with scrupulous Wit, now Arms must rule.


And fearelesse minds clyme soonest unto Crowns.
Brother, we will proclaim you out of hand,
The bruit thereof will bring you many friends.

Then be it as you will: for it is my right,
And Henry but usurps the Diadem.

I, now my Sovereign speaks like himself,
And now will I be Edwards Champion.

Sound Trumpet, Edward shall be here proclaimed:
Come, fellow Souldior, make thou proclamation.

Edward the Fourth, by the Grace of God, King of England and France, and Lord
of Ireland, etc


And whosoever gain says King Edwards right,
By this I challenge him to single fight.

Long live Edward the Fourth.


Thanks brave Mountgomery,
And thanks unto you all:
If fortune serve me, I Will requite this kindness.
Now for this Night, let us harbor here in York:
And when the Morning Sun shall raise his Carre
Above the Border of this Horizon,
We Will forward toward Warwick, and his Mates;
For well I wot, that Henry is no Soldier.
Ah froward Clarence, how evil it beseemes thee,
To flatter Henry, and forsake thy Brother?
Yet as we may, we will meet both thee and Warwick.
Come on brave Soldiers: doubt not of the Day,
And that once gotten, doubt not of large Pay.

What counsel, Lords? Edward from Belgia,
With hasty Germans, and blunt Hollanders,
Has passed in safety through the Narrow Seas,
And with his troops does march amain to London,
And many giddie people flock to him.

Let Us levy men, and beat him back again,


A little fire is quickly trodden out,
Which being suffered, Rivers cannot quench.

In Warwickshire I have true-hearted friends,
Not mutinous in peace, yet bold in War,
Those will I muster up: and thou Son Clarence
Shall stir up in Suffolk, Norfolk, and in Kent,
The Knights and Gentlemen, to come with thee.
Thou Brother Mountague, in Buckingham,
Northampton, and in Leicestershire, shall find
Men well inclined to hear what thou command'st.
And thou, brave Oxford, wondrous well beloved,
In Oxfordshire shall muster up thy friends.
My Sovereign, with the loving Citizens,
Like to his Island, gyrt in with the Ocean,
Or modest Dyan, circled with her Nymphs,
Shall rest in London, till we come to him:
Fair Lords take leave, and stand not to reply.
Farewell my Sovereign.

Farewell my Hector, and my Troyes true hope.


In sign of truth, I kiss your Highness Hand.


Well-minded Clarence, be thou fortunate.


Comfort, my Lord, and so I take my leave.


And thus I seal my truth, and bid adieu.


Sweet Oxford, and my loving Mountague,
And all at once, once more a happy farewell.

Farewell, sweet Lords, let us meet at Couentry.


Here at the Palace will I rest a while.
Cousin of Exeter, what thinks your Lordship?
Me thinks, the Power that Edward has in field,
Should not be able to encounter mine.

The doubt is, that he will seduce the rest.


That Is not my fear, my meed has got me fame:
I have not stopped mine ears to their demands,
Nor posted off their suites with slow delays,
My pity has been balm to heal their wounds,
My mildness has allayed their swelling griefs,
My mercy dried their water-flowing tears.
I have not been desirous of their wealth,
Nor much oppressed them with great Subsidies,
Nor forward of revenge, though they much erred.
Then why should they love Edward more then me?
No Exeter, these Graces challenge Grace:
And when the Lion fawnes upon the Lamb,
The Lamb will never cease to follow him.

Hark, hark, my Lord, what Shouts are these?


Seize on the shamefaced Henry, bear him hence,
And once again proclaim us King of England.
You are the Foun^, that makes small Brooks to flow,
Now stops thy Spring, my Sea shall suck them dry,
And swell so much the higher, by their ebb.
Hence with him to the Tower, let him not speak.
And Lords, toward Couentry bend we our course,
Where peremptory Warwick now remains:
The Sun shines hot, and if we use delay,
Cold biting Winter marres our hop'd-for Hay.

Away betimes, before his forces join,
And take the great-growne Traitor unawares:
Brave Warriors, march amain toward Couentry.

Where is the Post that came from valiant Oxford?
How far hence is thy Lord, mine honest fellow?

By this at Dunsmore, marching hitherward.


How far off is our Brother Mountague?
Where is the Post that came from Mountague?

By this at Daintry, with a puissant troop.


Say Someruile, what says my loving Son?
And by thy guess, how nigh is Clarence now?

At Southam I did leave him with his forces,
And do expect him here some two hours hence.

Then Clarence is at hand, I hear his Drum.


It is not his, my Lord, here Southam lies:
The Drum your Honor hears, marches from Warwick.

Who should that be? belike unlooked for friends.


They are at hand, and you shall quickly know.


Go, Trumpet, to the Walls, and sound a Parle.


See how the surly Warwick man's the Wall.


Oh vnbid spite, is sportfull Edward come?
Where slept our Scouts, or how are they seduced,
That we could hear no news of his repair.

Now Warwick, will thou open the City Gates,
Speak gentle words, and humbly bend thy Knee,
Call Edward King, and at his hands beg Mercy,
And he shall pardon thee these Outrages?

Nay rather, will thou draw thy forces hence,
Confess who set thee up, and plucked thee down,
Call Warwick Patron, and be penitent,
And thou shall still remain the Duke of York.

I thought at least he would have said the King,
Or did he make the Jest against his will?

Is not a Dukedom, Sir, a goodly gift?


I, by my faith, for a poor Earl to give,
I Will do thee service for so good a gift.

'Twas I that gave the Kingdom to thy Brother.


Why then it is mine, if but by Warwickes gift.


Thou art no Atlas for so great a weight:
And Weakeling, Warwick takes his gift again,
And Henry is my King, Warwick his Subject.

But Warwickes King is Edwards Prisoner:
And gallant Warwick, do but answer this,
What is the Body, when the Head is off?

Alas, that Warwick had no more forecast,
But whiles he thought to steal the single Ten,
The King was slyly fingered from the Deck:
You left poor Henry at the Bishops Palace,
And ten to one you will meet him in the Tower.

It Is even so, yet you are Warwick still.


Come Warwick,
Take the time, kneel down, kneel down:
Nay when? strike now, or else the Iron cooles.

I had rather chop this Hand off at a blow,
And with the other, fling it at thy face,
Then bear so low a sail, to strike to thee.

Sail how thou can,
Have Wind and Tide thy friend,
This Hand, fast wound about thy coale-black hair,
Shall, whiles thy Head is warm, and new cut off,
Write in the dust this Sentence with thy blood,
Wind-changing Warwick now can change no more.

Oh cheerful Colors, see where Oxford comes.


Oxford, Oxford, for Lancaster.


The Gates are open, let us enter too.


So other foes may set upon our backs.
Stand we in good array: for they no doubt
Will issue out again, and bid us battle;
If not, the City being but of small defense,
We Will quickly rowze the Traitors in the same.

Oh welcome Oxford, for we want thy help.


Mountague, Mountague, for Lancaster.


Thou and thy Brother both shall buy this Treason
Even with the dearest blood your bodies bear.

The harder matched, the greater Victory,
My mind presageth happy gain, and Conquest.

Somerset, Somerset, for Lancaster.


Two of thy Name, both Dukes of Somerset,
Have sold their Lives unto the House of York,
And thou shall be the third, if this Sword hold.

And lo, where George of Clarence sweepes along,
Of force enough to bid his Brother Battle:
With whom, in upright zeal to right, preuailes
More then the nature of a Brothers Love.
Come Clarence, come: thou will, if Warwick call.

Father of Warwick, know you what this means?
Look here, I throw my infamy at thee:
I will not ruinate my Fathers House,
Who gave his blood to lyme the stones together,
And set up Lancaster. Why, trowest thou, Warwick,
That Clarence is so harsh, so blunt unnatural,
To bend the fatal Instruments of War
Against his Brother, and his lawful King.
Perhaps thou will object my holy Oath:
To keep that Oath, were more impiety,
Then Iephah, when he sacrificed his Daughter.
I am so sorry for my Trespass made,
That to deserve well at my Brothers hands,
I here proclayme my self thy mortal foe:
With resolution, wheresoever I meet thee,
(As I will meet thee, if thou stir abroad)
To plague thee, for thy foul mis-leading me.
And so, prowd-hearted Warwick, I defy thee,
And to my Brother turn my blushing Cheeks.
Pardon me Edward, I will make amends:
And Richard, do not frown upon my faults,
For I will henceforth be no more unconstant.

Now welcome more, and ten times more beloved,
Then if thou never had deserved our hate.

Welcome good Clarence, this is Brother-like.


Oh passing Traitor, perjured and unjust.


What Warwick,
Will thou leave the Town, and fight?
Or shall we beat the Stones about thine Ears?

Alas, I am not cooped here for defense:
I will away toward Barnet presently,
And bid thee Battle, Edward, if thou dare.

Yes Warwick, Edward dares, and leads the way:
Lords to the field: Saint George, and Victory.

So, lie thou there: dye thou, and dye our fear,
For Warwick was a Bugge that feared us all.
Now Mountague sit fast, I seek for thee,
That Warwickes Bones may keep thine company.

Ah, who is nigh? come to me, friend, or foe,
And tell me who is Victor, York, or Warwick?
Why ask I that? my mangled body shows,
My blood, my want of strength, my sick heart shows,
That I must yield my body to the Earth,
And by my fall, the conquest to my foe.
Thus yields the Cedar to the Axes edge,
Whose Arms gave shelter to the Princely Eagle,
Under whose shade the ramping Lion slept,
Whose top-branch ouer-peer'd Jove's spreading Tree,
And kept low Shrubs from Winters powerful Wind.
These Eyes, that now are dimmed with Deaths black Veyle,
Have been as piercing as the Midday Sun,
To search the secret Treasons of the World:
The Wrinckles in my Brows, now filled with blood,
Were lik'ned often to Kingly Sepulchers:
For who lived King, but I could dig his Grave?
And who durst smile, when Warwick bent his Brow?
Lo, now my Glory smeared in dust and blood.
My Parkes, my Walks, my Manors that I had,
Even now forsake me; and of all my Lands,
Is nothing left me, but my bodies length.
Why, what is Pomp, Rule, Reign, but Earth and Dust?
And live we how we can, yet dye we must.

Ah Warwick, Warwick, were thou as we are,
We might recover all our Loss again:
The Queen from France has brought a puissant power.
Even now we heard the news: ah, could thou fly.

Why then I would not fly. Ah Mountague,
If thou be there, sweet Brother, take my Hand,
And with thy Lips keep in my Soul a while.
Thou love me not: for, Brother, if thou did,
Thy tears would wash this cold congealed blood,
That glewes my Lips, and will not let me speak.
Come quickly Mountague, or I am dead.

Ah Warwick, Mountague has breathed his last,
And to the latest gasp, cried out for Warwick:
And said, Commend me to my valiant Brother.
And more he would have said, and more he spoke,
Which sounded like a Cannon in a Vault,
That might not be distinguished: but at last,
I well might hear, delivered with a groan,
Oh farewell Warwick.

Sweet rest his Soul:
Fly Lords, and save your selves,
For Warwick bids you all farewell, to meet in Heaven.

Away, away, to meet the Queens great power.


Thus far our fortune keeps an upward course,
And we are graced with wreaths of Victory:
But in the midst of this bright-shining Day,
I spy a black suspicious threatening Cloud,
That will encounter with our glorious Sun,
Ere he attain his easefull Western Bed:
I mean, my Lords, those powers that the Queen
Has raised in Gallia, have arrived our Coast,
And, as we hear, march on to fight with us.

A little gale will soon disperse that Cloud,
And blow it to the Source from whence it came,
Thy very Beams will dry those Vapors up,
For every Cloud engenders not a Storm.

The Queen is valued thirty thousand strong,
And Somerset, with Oxford, fled to her:
If she have time to breathe, be well assured
Her faction will be full as strong as ours.

We are aduertis'd by our loving friends,
That they do hold their course toward Tewksbury.
We having now the best at Barnet field,
Will thither straight, for willingness rids way,
And as we march, our strength will be augmented:
In every County as we go along,
Strike up the Drum, cry courage, and away.

Great Lords, wise men never sit and wail their loss,
But chearely seek how to redress their harms.
What though the Mast be now blown ouer-boord,
The Cable broke, the holding-Anchor lost,
And half our Saylors swallowed in the flood?
Yet lives our Pilot still. Is It meet, that he
Should leave the Helm, and like a fearful Lad,
With tearefull Eyes add Water to the Sea,
And give more strength to that which has too much,
Whiles in his moan, the Ship splits on the Rock,
Which Industry and Courage might have saved?
Ah what a shame, ah what a fault were this.
Say Warwick was our Anchor: what of that?
And Mountague our Topmast: what of him?
Our slaught'red friends, the Tackles: what of these?
Why is not Oxford here, another Anchor?
And Somerset, another goodly Mast?
The friends of France our Shrowds and Tacklings?
And though unskillful, why not Ned and I,
For once allowed the skillful Pilots Charge?
We will not from the Helm, to sit and weep,
But keep our Course (though the rough Wind say no)
From Shelues and Rocks, that threaten us with Wrack.
As good to chide the Waves, as speak them fair.
And what is Edward, but a ruthlesse Sea?
What Clarence, but a Quick-sand of Deceit?
And Richard, but a raged fatal Rock?
All these, the Enemies to our poor Bark.
Say you can swim, alas it is but a while:
Tread on the Sand, why there you quickly sink,
Bestride the Rock, the Tide will wash you off,
Or else you famish, that is a threefold Death.
This speak I (Lords) to let you understand,
If case some one of you would fly from us,
That there is no hop'd-for Mercy with the Brothers,
More then with ruthlesse Waves, with Sands and Rocks.
Why courage then, what cannot be avoided,
'Twere childish weakness to lament, or fear.

Me thinks a Woman of this valiant Spirit,
Should, if a Coward heard her speak these words,
Infuse his Breast with Magnanimity,
And make him, naked, foil a man at Arms.
I speak not this, as doubting any here:
For did I but suspect a fearful man,
He should have leave to go away betimes,
Least in our need he might infect another,
And make him of like spirit to himself.
If any such be here, as God forbid,
Let him depart, before we need his help.

Women and Children of so high a courage,
And Warriors faint, why 'twere perpetual shame.
Oh brave young Prince: thy famous Grandfather
Does live again in thee; long may thou live,
To bear his Image, and renew his Glories.

And he that will not fight for such a hope,
Go home to Bed, and like the Owl by day,
If he arise, be mocked and wondered at.

Thanks gentle Somerset, sweet Oxford thanks.


And take his thanks, that yet has nothing else.


Prepare you Lords, for Edward is at hand,
Ready to fight: therefore be resolute.

I thought no less: it is his Policy,
To haste thus fast, to find us unprovided.

But he is deceived, we are in readiness.


This cheares my heart, to see your forwardness.


Here pitch our Battle, hence we will not budge.


Brave followers, yonder stands the thornie Wood,
Which by the Heavens assistance, and your strength,
Must by the Roots be hew'ne up yet ere Night.
I need not add more fuel to your fire,
For well I wot, ye blaze, to burn them out:
Give signal to the fight, and to it Lords.

Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen, what I should say,
My tears gainsay: for every word I speak,
Ye see I drink the water of my eye.
Therefore no more but this: Henry your Sovereign
Is Prisoner to the Foe, his State usurped,
His Realm a slaughterhouse, his Subjects slain,
His Statutes cancelled, and his Treasure spent:
And yonder is the Wolf, that makes this spoil.
You fight in Justice: then in Gods Name, Lords,
Be valiant, and give signal to the fight.

Now here a period of tumultuous Broils.
Away with Oxford to Hames Castle straight:
For Somerset, off with his guilty Head.
Go bear them hence, I will not hear them speak.

For my part, I Will not trouble thee with words.


Nor I, but stoop with patience to my fortune.


So part we sadly in this troublous World,
To meet with Joy in sweet Jerusalem.

Is Proclamation made, That who finds Edward,
Shall have a high Reward, and he his Life?

It is, and lo where youthful Edward comes.


Bring forth the Gallant, let us hear him speak.
What? can so young a Thorn begin to prick?
Edward, what satisfaction can thou make,
For bearing Arms, for stirring up my Subjects,
And all the trouble thou have turned me to?

Speak like a Subject, proud ambitious York.
Suppose that I am now my Fathers Mouth,
Resign thy Chair, and where I stand, kneel thou,
Whilst I propose the selfsame words to thee,
Which (Traitor) thou would have me answer to.

Ah, that thy Father had been so resolved.


That you might still have worn the Petticoat,
And never have stolen the Breech from Lancaster.

Let Aesop fable in a Winters Night,
His Currish Riddles sorts not with this place.

By Heaven, Brat, I Will plague ye for that word.


I, thou wast borne to be a plague to men.


For Gods sake, take away this Captive Scold.


Nay, take away this scolding Crooke-backe, rather.


Peace wilful Boy, or I will charm your tongue.


Vntutor'd Lad, thou art too malapert.


I know my duty, you are all undutiful:
Lascivious Edward, and thou perjured George,
And thou misshapen Dicke, I tell ye all,
I am your better, Traitors as ye are,
And thou vsurp'st my Fathers right and mine.

Take that, the likeness of this Rayler here.


Sprawl'st thou? take that, to end thy agony.


And there is for twitting me with perjury.


Oh, kill me too.


Marry, and shall.


Hold, Richard, hold, for we have done too much.


Why should she live, to fill the World with words.


What? does she swowne? use means for her recovery.


Clarence excuse me to the King my Brother:
I Will hence to London on a serious matter,
Ere ye come there, be sure to hear some news.

What? what?


Tower, the Tower.


Oh Ned, sweet Ned, speak to thy Mother Boy.
Can thou not speak? O Traitors, Murderers!
They that stabbed Caesar, shed no blood at all:
Did not offend, nor were not worthy Blame,
If this foul deed were by, to equal it.
He was a Man; this (in respect) a Child,
And Men, never spend their fury on a Child.
What Is worse then Murderer, that I may name it?
No, no, my heart will burst, and if I speak,
And I will speak, that so my heart may burst.
Butchers and Villains, bloody Caniballes,
How sweet a Plant have you untimely cropped:
You have no children (Butchers) if you had,
The thought of them would have stirred up remorse,
But if you ever chance to have a Child,
Look in his youth to have him so cut off.
As deathsmen you have rid this sweet young Prince.

Away with her, go bear her hence perforce.


Nay, never bear me hence, dispatch me here:
Here sheath thy Sword, I Will pardon thee my death:
What? will thou not? Then Clarence do it thou.

By heaven, I will not do thee so much ease.


Good Clarence do: sweet Clarence do thou do it.


Did thou not hear me swear I would not do it?


I, but thou use to forswear thy self.
'Twas Sin before, but now it is Charity.
What wilt you not? Where is that devils butcher Richard?
Hard fauor'd Richard? Richard, where art thou?
Thou art not here; Murder is thy Almes-deed:
Petitioners for Blood, thou never put'st back.

Away I say, I charge ye bear her hence,


So come to you, and yours, as to this Prince.


Where Is Richard gone.


To London all in post, and as I guess,
To make a bloody Supper in the Tower.

He Is sudden if a thing comes in his head.
Now march we hence, discharge the common sort
With Pay and Thanks, and let us away to London,
And see our gentle Queen how well she fares,
By this (I hope) she has a Son for me.

Good day, my Lord, what at your Book so hard?


I my good Lord: my Lord I should say rather,
It Is sin to flatter, Good was little better:
'Good Gloucester, and good Devil, were alike,
And both preposterous: therefore, not Good Lord.

Sir, leave us to our selves, we must confer.


So flies the wreaklesse shepherd from ye Wolf:
So first the harmless Sheep does yield his Fleece,
And next his Throat, unto the Butchers Knife.
What Scene of death has Rossius now to Act?

Suspicion always haunts the guilty mind,
The Thief does fear each bush an Officer,

The Bird that has bin limed in a bush,
With trembling wings misdoubteth every bush;
And I the hapless Male to one sweet Bird,
Have now the fatal Object in my eye,
Where my poor young was lim'd, was caught, and killed.

Why what a peevish Fool was that of Creet,
That taught his Son the office of a Foul,
And yet for all his wings, the Fool was drowned.

I Dedaius, my poor Boy Icarus,
Thy Father Minos, that deni'de our course,
The Sun that seared the wings of my sweet Boy.
Thy Brother Edward, and thy Self, the Sea
Whose envious Gulf did swallow up his life:
Ah, kill me with thy Weapon, not with words,
My breast can better brook thy Daggers point,
Then can my ears that Tragic History.
But wherefore do thou come? Is It for my Life?

Think thou I am an Executioner?


A Persecutor I am sure thou art,
If murdering Innocents be Executing.
Why then thou art an Executioner.

Thy Son I killed for his presumption.


Had thou bin killed, when first you did presume,
Thou had not lived to kill a Son of mine:
And thus I prophecy, that many a thousand,
Which now mistrust no parcel of my fear,
And many an old man's sighe, and many a Widows,
And many an Orphans water-standing-eye,
Men for their Sons, Wives for their Husbands,
Orphans, for their Parents timeles death,
Shall rue the hour that ever thou was it borne.
The Owl shrieked at thy birth, an evil sign,
The Night-Crow cry'de, aboding lucklesse time,
Dogs howled, and hiddeous Tempest shook down Trees:
The Raven rook'd her on the Chimnies top,
And chatt'ring Pies in dismal Discords sung:
Thy Mother felt more then a Mothers pain,
And yet brought forth less then a Mothers hope,
To wit, an indigested and deformed lump,
Not like the fruit of such a goodly Tree.
Teeth had thou in thy head, when thou was it borne,
To signify, thou came to bite the world:
And if the rest be true, which I have heard,
Thou came --

I Will hear no more:
Dye Prophet in thy speech,
For this (among'st the rest) was I ordained.

I, and for much more slaughter after this,
O God forgive my sins, and pardon thee.

What? will the aspiring blood of Lancaster
Sink in the ground? I thought it would have mounted.
See how my sword weeps for the poor Kings death.
O may such purple tears be always shed
From those that wish the downfall of our house.
If any spark of Life be yet remaining,
Down, down to hell, and say I sent thee thither.
I that have neither pity, love, nor fear,
Indeed it is true that Henry told me of:
For I have often heard my Mother say,
I came into the world with my Legs forward.
Had I not reason (think ye) to make have,
And seek their Ruin, that usurped our Right?
The Midwife wondered, and the Women cri'de
O Jesus bless us, he is borne with teeth,
And so I was, which plainly signified,
That I should snarle, and bite, and play the dog:
Then since the Heavens have shaped my Body so,
Let Hell make crook'd my Mind to answer it.
I have no Brother, I am like no Brother:
And this word [Loue] which Gray-beards call Divine,
Be resident in men like one another,
And not in me: I am my self alone.
Clarence beware, thou keept'st me from the Light,
But I will sort a pitchy day for thee:
For I will buzze abroad such Prophesies,
That Edward shall be fearful of his life,
And then to purge his fear, I Will be thy death.
King Henry, and the Prince his Son are gone,
Clarence thy turn is next, and then the rest,
Counting my self but bad, till I be best.
I Will throw thy body in another room,
And Triumph Henry, in thy day of Doom.

Once more we sit in Englands Royal Throne,
Re-purchac'd with the Blood of Enemies:
What valiant Foe-men, like to Autumnes Corn,
Have we mowed down in tops of all their pride?
Three Dukes of Somerset, threefold Renown,
For hardy and undoubted Champions:
Two Cliffords, as the Father and the Son,
And two Northumberlands: two brauer men,
Never spurred their Coursers at the Trumpets sound.
With them, the two brave Bears, Warwick and Montague,
That in their Chains fettered the Kingly Lion,
And made the Forest tremble when they roared.
Thus have we swept Suspicion from our Seat,
And made our Footstool of Security.
Come hither Besse, and let me kiss my Boy:
Young Ned, for thee, thine Uncles, and my self,
Have in our Armors watched the Winters night,
Went all afoote in Summers scalding heat,
That thou might repossesse the Crown in peace,
And of our Labors thou shall reap the gain.

I Will blast his Harvest, if your head were laid,
For yet I am not looked on in the world.
This shoulder was ordained so thick, to heave,
And heave it shall some weight, or break my back,
Work thou the way, and that shall execute.

Clarence and Gloucester, love my lovely Queen,
And kis your Princely Nephew Brothers both.

The duty that I owe unto your Majesty,
I Seal upon the lips of this sweet Babe.

Thank Noble Clarence, worthy brother thanks.


And that I love the tree from whence you sprang'st:
Witness the loving kiss I give the Fruit,
To say the truth, so Judas kissed his master,
And cried all hail, when as he meant all harm.

Now am I seated as my soul delights,
Having my Countries peace, and Brothers loves.

What will your Grace have done with Margaret,
Reynard her Father, to the King of France
Has pawned the Sicils and Jerusalem,
And hither have they sent it for her ransom.

Away with her, and waft her hence to France:
And now what rests, but that we spend the time
With stately Triumphs, mirthfull Comicke shows,
Such as befits the pleasure of the Court.
Sound Drums and Trumpets, farewell sour annoy,
For here I hope begins our lasting joy.


