OLd John of Gaunt, time-honoured Lancaster,
Have thou according to thy oath and band
Brought hither Henry Herford thy bold son:
Here to make good ye boistrous late appeal,
Which then our leisure would not let us hear,
Against the Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray?

I have my Liege.


Tell me moreover, have thou sounded him,
If he appeal the Duke on ancient malice,
Or worthily as a good subject should
On some known ground of treachery in him.

As near as I could sift him on that argument,
On some apparent danger seen in him,
Aimed at your Highness, no inueterate malice.

Then call them to our presence face to face,
And frowning brow to brow, our selves will hear
The accuser, and the accused, freely speak;
High stomack^d are they both, and full of ire,
In rage, deaf as the sea; hasty as fire.

Many years of happy days befall
My gracious Sovereign, my most loving Liege.

Each day still better others happiness,
Until the heavens envying earths good hap,
Add an immortal title to your Crown.

We thank you both, yet one but flatters us,
As well appears by the cause you come,
Namely, to appeal each other of high treason.
Coosin of Hereford, what do thou object
Against the Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray?

First, heaven be the record to my speech,
In the devotion of a subjects love,
Tendering the precious safety of my Prince,
And free from other misbegotten hate,
Come I appealant to this Princely presence.
Now Thomas Mowbray do I turn to thee,
And mark my greeting well: for what I speak,
My body shall make good upon this earth,
Or my divine soul answer it in heaven.
Thou art a Traitor, and a Miscreant;
Too good to be so, and too bad to live,
Since the more fair and crystal is the sky,
The vglier seem the clouds that in it fly:
Once more, the more to aggrauate the note,
With a foul Traitors name stuff I thy throat,
And wish (so please my Sovereign) ere I move,
What my tongue speaks, my right drawn sword may prove

Let not my cold words here accuse my zeal:
It Is not the trial of a Woman's war,
The bitter clamor of two eager tongues,
Can arbitrate this cause betwixt us twain:
The blood is hot that must be cooled for this.
Yet can I not of such tame patience boast,
As to be hushed, and naught at all to say.
First the fair reverence of your Highness curbes me,
From giving reins and spurs to my free speech,
Which else would post, until it had returned
These terms of treason, doubly down his throat.
Setting aside his high bloods royalty,
And let him be no Kinsman to my Liege,
I do defy him, and I spit at him,
Call him a slanderous Coward, and a Villain:
Which to maintain, I would allow him odds,
And meet him, were I tide to run afoote,
Even to the frozen ridges of the Alps,
Or any other ground inhabitable,
Where ever Englishman durst set his foot.
Mean time, let this defend my loyalty,
By all my hopes most falsely does he lie.

Pale trembling Coward, there I throw my gage,
Disclaiming here the kindred of a King,
And lay aside my high bloods Royalty,
Which fear, not reverence makes thee to except.
If guilty dread has left thee so much strength,
As to take up mine Honors pawn, then stoop.
By that, and all the rites of Knighthood else,
Will I make good against thee arm to arm,
What I have spoken, or thou can devise.

I take it up, and by that sword I swear,
Which gently laid my Knighthood on my shoulder,
I Will answer thee in any fair degree,
Or Chiualrous design of knightly trial:
And when I mount, alive may I not light,
If I be Traitor, or unjustly fight.

What does our Cousin lay to Mowbraies charge?
It must be great that can inherit us,
So much as of a thought of ill in him.

Look what I said, my life shall prove it true,
That Mowbray has received eight thousand Nobles,
(...) ^ame of lendings for your Highness Soldiers,
^e which he has detained for lewd employments,
like a false Traitor, and inuirious Villain.
Besides I say, and will in battle prove,
Or here, or elsewhere to the furthest Verge
That ever was suruey'd by English eye,
That all the Treasons for these eighteen years
Complotted, and contrived in this Land,
Fetched from false Mowbray their first head and spring*
Further I say* and further will maintain
Upon his bad life, to make all this good.
That he did plot the Duke of Glousters death,
Suggest his soon believing adversaries,
And consequently, like a Traitor Coward,
Sluc'd out his innocent soul through streams of blood:
Which blood, like sacrificing Abels cries,
(Even from the toonglesse cauernes of the earth)
To me for justice, and rough chasticement:
And by the glorious worth of my descent,
This arm shall do it, or this life be spent.

How high a pitch his resolution soars:
Thomas of Norfolk, what say thou to this?

Oh let my Sovereign turn away his face,
And bid his ears a little while be deaf,
Till I have told this slander of his blood,
How God and good men, hate so foul a liar.

Mowbray, impartial are our eyes and ears,
Were he my brother, nay our kingdoms heir,
As he is but my fathers brothers son;
Now by my Scepters awe, I make a vow,
Such neighbour-neerenesse to our sacred blood,
Should nothing privilege him, nor partialize
The vn-stooping firmness of my upright soul.
He is our subject (Mowbray) so art thou,
Free speech, and fearelesse, I to thee allow.

Then Bullingbrooke, as low as to thy heart,
Through the false passage of thy throat; thou lie:
Three parts of that receipt I had for Callice,
Disburst I to his Highness soldiers;
The other part reserved I by consent,
For that my Sovereign Liege was in my debt,
Upon remainder of a dear Account,
Since last I went to France to fetch his Queen:
Now swallow down that Lie. For Glousters death,
I slew him not; but (to mine own disgrace)
Neglected my sworn duty in that case:
For you my noble Lord of Lancaster,
The honorable Father to my foe,
Once I did lay an ambush for your life,
A trespass that does vex my grieved soul:
But ere I last received the Sacrament,
I did confess it, and exactly begged
Your Graces pardon, and I hope I had it.
This is my fault: as for the rest appealed,
It issues from the rancour of a Villain,
A recreant, and most degenerate Traitor,
Which in my self I boldly will defend,
And interchangeably hurl down my gage
Upon this ouer-weening Traitors foot,
To prove my self a loyal Gentleman,
Even in the best blood chamber'd in his bosom*
In have whereof, most heartily I pray
Your Highness to assign our Trial day.

Wrath-kindled Gentlemen be ruled by me:
Let Us purge this choler without letting blood:
This we prescribe, though no Physician,
Deep malice makes too deep incision.
Forget, forgive, conclude, and be agreed*
Our Doctors say, This is no time to bleed.
Good Uncle, let this end where it begun*
We Will calm the Duke of Norfolk* you, your son.

To be a make-peace shall become my age,
Throw down (my son) the Duke of Norfolkes gage.

And Norfolk, throw down hi^


When Harris when Obedience bids,
Obedience bids I should not bid again.

Norfolk, throw down, we bid; there is no boot.


My self I throw (dread Sovereign) at thy foot.
My life thou shall command, but not my shame,
The one my duty owes, but my fair name
Despite of death, that lives upon my grave
To dark dishonours use, thou shall not have.
I am disgraced, impeached, and baffel'd here,
Pierced to the soul with slanders venomed spear:
The which no balm can cure, but his heart blood
Which breathed this poison.

Rage must be withstood:
Give me his gage: Lions make Leopards tame.

Yea, but not change his spots: take but my sha^,
And I resign my gage* My dear, dear Lord,
The purest treasure mortal times afford
Is spotless reputation: that away,
Men are but gilded loame, or painted clay.
A Jewel in a ten times barred up Chest,
Is a bold spirit, in a loyal breast.
Mine Honor is my life; both grow in one:
Take Honor from me, and my life is done.
Then (dear my Liege) mine Honor let me try,
In that I live; and for that will I die.

Coosin, throw down your gage,
Do you begin.

Oh heaven defend my soul from such foul sin.
Shall I seem Crest-falne in my fathers sight,
Or with pale beggar-feare impeach my hight
Before this out-dar'd dastard? Ere my tongue,
Shall wound mine honor with such feeble wrong;
Or sound so base a parle: my teeth shall tear
The slavish motive of recanting fear.
And spit it bleeding in his high disgrace,
Where shame does harbor, even in Mowbrayes face.

We were not borne to sue, but to command,
Which since we cannot do to make you friends,
Be ready, (as your lives shall answer it)
At Couentree, upon S. Lamberts day:
There shall your swords and Lances arbitrate
The swelling difference of your settled hate:
Since we cannot atone you, you shall see
Justice design the Victors Chivalry.
Lord Marshall, command our Officers at Arms,
Be ready to direct these home Alarmes.

Alas, the part I had in Glousters blood,
Does more solicit me then your exclaimes,
To stir against the Butchers of his life.
But since correction lies in those hands
Which made the fault that we cannot correct,
Put we our quarrel to the will of heaven,
Who when they see the hours ripe on earth,
Will reign hot vengeance on offenders heads.

Finds brotherhood in thee no sharper spur?
Has love in thy old blood no living fire?
Edwards seven sons (whereof thy self art one)
Were as seven violles of his Sacred blood,
Or seven fair branches springing from one root:
Some of those seven are dride by natures course,
Some of those branches by the destinies cut:
But Thomas, my dear Lord, my life, my Glouster,
One Violl full of Edwards Sacred blood,
One flourishing branch of his most Royal root
Is cracked, and all the precious liquor spilt;
Is hackt down, and his summer leafes all vaded
By Enuies hand, and Murders bloody Axe.
Ah Gaunt! His blood was thine, that bed, that womb,
That mettle, that selfe-mould that fashioned thee,
Made him a man: and though thou live, and breathe,
Yet art thou slain in him: thou do consent
In some large measure to thy Fathers death,
In that thou see thy wretched brother dye,
Who was the model of thy Fathers life.
Call it not patience (Gaunt) it is despair,
In suffering thus thy brother to be slaughtered,
Thou show the naked pathway to thy life,
Teaching stern murder how to butcher thee:
That which in mean men we entitle patience
Is pale cold cowardice in noble breasts:
What shall I say, to safeguard thine own life,
The best way is to venge my Glousters death.

Heavens is the quarrel: for heavens substitute
His Deputy anointed in his sight,
Has caused his death, the which if wrongfully
Let heaven revenge: for I may never lift
An angry arm against his Minister.

Where then (alas may I) complaint my self?


To heaven, the widows Champion to defense


Why then I will: farewell old Gaunt.
Thou go to Couentrie, there to behold
Our Cosine Herford, and fell Mowbray fight:
O sit my husbands wrongs on Herfords spear,
That it may enter butcher Mowbrayes breast:
Or if misfortune miss the first carreere,
Be Mowbrayes sins so heavy in his bosom,
That they may break his foaming Coursers back,
And throw the Rider headlong in the Lists,
A Gaytiffe recreant to my Cosine Herford:
Farewell old Gaunt, thy sometimes brothers wife
With her companion Grief, must end her life.

Sister farewell: I must to Couentree,
As much good stay with thee, as go with me.

Yet one word more: Grief boundeth where it falls,
Not with the empty hollownes, but weight:
I take my leave, before I have begun,
For sorrow ends not, when it seems done.
Commend me to my brother Edmund York.
Lo, this is all: nay, yet depart not so,
Though this be all, do not so quickly go,
I shall remember more. Bid him, Oh, what?
With all good speed at Plashie visit me.
Alack, and what shall good old York there see
But empty lodgings, and vnfurnish'd walls,
Vn-peopel'd Offices, untrodden stones?
And what hear there for welcome, but my groans?
Therefore commend me, let him not come there,
To seek out sorrow, that dwells every where:
Desolate, desolate will I hence, and dye,
The last leave of thee, takes my weeping eye.

My L. Aumerle, is Harry Herford armed.


Yea, at all points, and longs to enter in.


The Duke of Norfolk, sprightfully and bold,
Stays but the summons of the Appealants Trumpet.

Why then the Champions, are prepared, and stay
For nothing but his Majesty's approach.

Marshall, demand of yonder Champion
The cause of his arrival here in Arms,
Ask him his name, and orderly proceed
To swear him in the justice of his cause.

In Gods name, and the Kings, say who you art,
And why thou come thus knightly clad in Arms?
Against what man thou come, and what is thy quarrel,
Speak truly on thy knighthood, and thine oath,
As so defend thee heaven, and thy valor.

My name is Tho. Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk,
Who hither comes engaged by my oath
(Which heaven defend a knight should violate)
Both to defend my loyalty and truth,
To God, my King, and his succeeding issue,
Against the Duke of Herford, that appeals me:
And by the grace of God, and this mine arm,
To prove him (in defending of my self)
A Traitor to my God, my King, and me,
And as I truly fight, defend me heaven.

Marshall: Ask yonder Knight in Arms,
Both who he is, and why he comes hither,
Thus placed in habiliments of war:
And formerly according to our Law
Depose him in the justice of his cause.

What is thy name? and wherefore comst you hither
Before King Richard in his Royal Lists?
Against whom come thou? and what is thy quarrel?
Speak like a true Knight, so defend thee heaven.

Harry of Herford, Lancaster, and Derbie,
Am I: who ready here do stand in Arms,
To prove by heavens grace, and my bodies valor,
In Lists, on Thomas Mowbray Duke of Norfolk,
That he is a Traitor foul, and dangerous,
To God of heaven, King Richard, and to me,
And as I truly fight, defend me heaven.

On pain of death, no person be so bold,
Or daring hardy as to touch the Listes,
Except the Marshall, and such Officers
Appointed to direct these fair designs.

Lord Marshall, let me kiss my Soueraigns hand,
And bow my knee before his Majesty:
For Mowbray and my self are like two men,
That vow a long and weary pilgrimage,
Then let us take a ceremonious leave
And lo^ing farewell of our several friends.

The Appealant in all duty greets your Highness,
And craves to kiss your hand, and take his leave.

We will descend, and fold him in our arms.
Cousin of Herford, as thy cause is just,
So be thy fortune in this Royal fight:
Farewell, my blood, which if to day thou shead,
Lament we may, but not revenge thee dead.

Oh let no noble eye profane a tear
For me, if I be gored with Mowbrayes spear:
As confident, as is the Falcons flight
Against a bird, do I with Mowbray fight.
My loving Lord, I take my leave of you,
Of you (my Noble Cousin) Lord Aumerle;
Not sick, although I have to do with death,
But lusty, young, and cheerely drawing breath.
Lo, as at English Feasts, so I regreete
The daintiest last, to make the end most sweet.
Oh thou the earthy author of my blood,
Whose youthful spirit in me regenerate,
Does with a twofold rigor lift me up
To reach at victory above my head,
Add proof unto mine Armor with thy prayres,
And with thy blessings steel my Lances point,
That it may enter Mowbrayes waxen Coat,
And fu^nish new the name of John a Gaunt,
Even in the lusty hauiour of his son.

Heaven in thy good cause make thee prosperous
Be swift like lightning in the execution,
And let thy blows doubly redoubled.
Fall like amazing thunder on the Caske
Of thy amazed pernicious enemy.
Rouse up thy youthful blood, be valiant, and live.

Mine innocence, and S. George to thrive.


How ever heaven or fortune cast my lot,
There lives, or dies, true to Kings Richards Throne,
A loyal, just, and upright Gentleman:
Never did Captive with a freer heart,
Cast off his chains of bondage, and embrace
His golden vncontroul'd enfranchisement,
More then my dancing soul does celebrate
This Feast of Battle, with mine Adversary.
Most mighty Liege, and my companion Peers,
Take from my mouth, the wish of happy years,
As gentle, and as iocond, as to jest,
Go I to fight: Truth, has a quiet breast.

Farewell, my Lord, securely I espy
Virtue with Valor, couched in thine eye:
Order the trial Marshall, and begin.

Harrie of Herford, Lancaster, and Derby,
Receive thy Lance, and heaven defend thy right.

Strong as a tower in hope, I cry Amen.


Go bear this Lance to Thomas D. of Norfolk.


Harry of Herford, Lancaster, and Derbie,
Stands here for God, his Sovereign, and himself,
On pain to be found false, and recreant,
To prove the Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray,
A Traitor to his God, his King, and him,
And dares him to set forwards to the fight.

Here stands Tho: Mowbray Duke of Norfolk
On pain to be found false and recreant,
Both to defend himself, and to approve
Henry of Herford, Lancaster, and Derby,
To God, his Sovereign, and to him disloyal:
Courageously, and with a free desire
Attending but the signal to begin.

Sound Trumpets, and set forward Combatants:
Stay, the King has thrown his Warder down.

Let them lay by their Helmets and their Spears,
And both return back to their Chaires again:
Withdraw with us, and let the Trumpets sound,
While we return these Dukes what we decree.
Draw near and list
What with our Council we have done.
For that our kingdoms earth should not be soyld
With that dear blood which it has fostered,
And for our eyes do hate the dire aspect
Of civil wounds plowgh'd up with neighbors swords,
Which so roused up with boystrous untuned drums,
With harsh resounding Trumpets dreadful bray,
And grating shocke of wrathful iron Arms,
Might from our quiet Confines fright fair peace,
And make us wade even in our kindreds blood:
Therefore, we banish you our Territories.
You Cousin Herford, upon pain of death,
Till twice five Summers have enriched our fields,
Shall not regreet our fair dominions,
But tread the stranger paths of banishment.

Your will be done: This must my comfort be,
That Sun that warmes you here, shall shine on me:
And those his golden beams to you here lent,
Shall point on me, and gild my banishment.

Norfolk: for thee remains a heavier dombe,
Which I with some unwillingness pronounce,
The slye slow hours shall not determinate
The datelesse limit of thy dear exile:
The hopeless word, of Never to return,
Breath I against thee, upon pain of life.

A heavy sentence, my most Sovereign Liege,
And all unlooked for from your Highness mouth:
A deerer merit, not so deep a maime,
As to be cast forth in the common air
Have I deserved at your Highness hands.
The Language I have learned these forty years
(My native English) now I must forgo,
And now my tongues use is to me no more,
Then an vnstringed Vyall, or a Harp,
Or like a cunning Instrument cased up,
Or being open, put into his hands
That knows no touch to tune the harmony.
Within my mouth you have engaol'd my tongue,
Doubly percullist with my teeth and lips,
And dull, unfeeling, barren ignorance,
Is made my Jailer to attend on me:
I am too old to fawn upon a Nurse,
Too far in years to be a pupil now:
What is thy sentence then, but speechless death,
Which robs my tongue from breathing native breath?

It boots thee not to be compassionate,
After our sentence, plaining comes too late.

Then thus I turn me from my countries light
To dwell in solemn shades of endless night.

Return again, and take an oath with thee,
Lay on our Royal sword, your banished hands;
Swear by the duty that you owe to heaven
(Our part therein we banish with your selves)
To keep the Oath that we administer:
You never shall (so help you Truth, and Heaven)
Embrace each others love in banishment,
Nor ever look upon each others face,
Nor ever write, regreete, or reconcile
This lowering tempest of your homebred hate,
Nor ever by advised purpose meet,
To plot, contriue, or complot any ill,
Against Us, our State, our Subjects, or our Land.

I swear.


And I, to keep all this.


Norfolk, so fare, as to mine enemy,
By this time (had the King permitted us)
One of our souls had wandered in the air,
Banished this frail sepulcher of our flesh,
As now our flesh is banished from this Land.
Confess thy Treasons, ere thou fly this Realm,
Since thou have far to go, bear not along
The clogging burden of a guilty soul.

No Bullingbroke: If ever I were Traitor,
My name be blotted from the book of Life,
And I from heaven banished, as from hence:
But what thou art, heaven, thou, and I do know,
And all too soon (I fear) the King shall rue.
Farewell (my Liege) now no way can I stray,
Save back to England, all the worlds my way.

Uncle, even in the glasses of thine eyes
I see thy grieved heart: thy sad aspect,
Has from the number of his banished years
Plucked four away: Six frozen Winters spent,
Return with welcome home, from banishment.

How long a time lies in one little word:
Four lagging Winters, and four wanton springs
End in a word, such is the breath of Kings.

I thank my Liege, that in regard of me
He shortens four years of my sons exile:
But little vantage shall I reap thereby.
For ere the six years that he has to spend
Can change their Moons, and bring their times about,
My oyle-dride Lamp, and time-bewasted light
Shall be extinct with age, and endless night:
My inch of Taper, will be burnt, and done,
And blindfold death, not let me see my son.

Why Uncle, thou have many years to live.


But not a minute (King) that thou can give;
Shorten my days thou can with sudden sorrow,
And pluck nights from me, but not lend a morrow:
Thou can help time to furrow me with age,
But stop no wrinkle in his pilgrimage:
Thy word is current with him, for my death,
But dead, thy kingdom cannot buy my breath.

Thy son is banished upon good advice,
Whereto thy tongue a party-verdict gave,
Why at our Justice seem thou then to lowre?

Things sweet to taste, prove in digestion sour:
You urged me as a Judge, but I had rather
you would have bid me argue like a Father.
Alas, I looked when some of you should say,
I was too strict to make mine own away:
But you gave leave to my unwilling tongue,
Against my will, to do my self this wrong.

Cosine farewell: and Uncle bid him so:
Six years we banish him, and he shall go.

Cosine farewell: what presence must not know
From where you do remain, let paper show.

My Lord, no leave take I, for I will ride
As far as land will let me, by your side.

Oh to what purpose do thou hord thy words,
That thou teturnst no greeting to thy friends?

I have too few to take my leave of you,
When the tongues office should be prodigal,
To breath the abundant dolor of the heart.

Thy grief is but thy absence for a time.


Joy absent, grief is present for that time.


What is six Winters, they are quickly gone?


To men in joy, but grief makes one hour ten.


Call it a travel that thou take for pleasure.


My heart will sigh, when I miscall it so,
Which finds it an enforced Pilgrimage.

The sullen passage of thy weary steps
Esteem a soil, wherein thou art to set
The precious Jewel of thy home return.

Oh who can hold a fire in his hand
By thinking on the frostie Caucasus?
Or cloy the hungry edge of appetite,
by bare imagination of a Feast?
Or Wallow naked in December snow
by thinking on fantastic summers heat?
Oh no, the apprehension of the good
Gives but the greater feeling to the worse:
Fell sorrows tooth, does ever ranckle more
Then when it bites, but lanceth not the sore.

Come, come (my son) I Will bring thee on thy way
Had I thy youth, and cause, I would not stay.

Then Englands ground farewell: sweet soil adieu,
My Mother, and my Nurse, which bears me yet:
Where ere I wander, boast of this I can,
Though banished, yet a true-borne Englishman.

We did observe. Cosine Aumerle,
How far brought you high Herford on his way?

I brought high Herford (if you call him so) but to the next high way, and
there I left him


And say, what store of parting tears were shed?


Faith none for me: except the Northeast wind
Which then grew bitterly against our face,
Awaked the sleepie rhew me, and so by chance
Did grace our hollow parting with a tear.

What said our Cousin when you parted with him?


Farewell: and for my heart disdained yt my tongue
Should so profane the word, that taught me craft
To counterfeit oppression of such grief,
That word seemed buried in my sorrows grave.
Marry, would the word Farewell, have lengthened hours,
And added years to his short banishment,
He should have had a volume of Farwels,
but since it would not, he had none of me.

He is our Cousin (Cousin) but it is doubt,
When time shall call him home from banishment,
Whether our kinsman come to see his friends,
Our self, and Bushy: here Bagot and Green
Observed his Courtship to the common people:
How he did seem to diue into their hearts,
With humble, and familiat courtesy,
What reverence he did throw away on slaves;
Wooing poor Craftes-men, with the craft of souls,
And patient vnder-bearing of his Fortune,
As 'twere to banish their affects with him.
Off goes his bonnet to an Oyster-wench,
A brace of Dray-men bid God speed him well,
And had the tribute of his supple knee,
With thanks my Countrymen, my loving friends,
As were our England in reuersion his,
And he our subjects next degree in hope.

Well, he is gone, and with him go these thoughts:
Now for the Rebels, which stand out in Ireland,
Expedient manage must be made my Liege
Ere further leisure, yield them further means
For their advantage, and your Highness loss.

We will our self in person to this war,
And for our Coffers, with too great a Court,
And liberal Largess, are grown somewhat light,
We are enforced to farm our royal Realm,
The Reuennew whereof shall furnish us
For our affairs in hand: if that come short
Our Substitutes at home shall have Blanke-charters:
Whereto, when they shall know what men are rich,
They shall subscribe them for large sums of Gold,
And send them after to supply our wants:
For we will make for Ireland presently.

what news?


Old John of Gaunt is very sick my Lord,
Suddenly taken, and has sent post haste
To entreat your Majesty to visit him.

Where lies he?


At Ely house.


Now put it (heaven) in his Physicians mind,
To help him to his grave immediately:
The lining of his coffers shall make Coats
To deck our soldiers for these Irish wars.
Come Gentlemen, let us all go visit him:
Pray heaven we may make have, and come too late.

Will the King come, that I may breath my last
In wholesome counsel to his unstaid youth?

Vex not your self, nor strive not with your breath,
For all in vain comes counsel to his ear.

Oh but (they say) the tongues of dying men
Enforce attention like deep harmony;
Where words are scarce, they are seldom spent in vain,
For they breath truth, that breath their words in pain.
He that no more must say, is listened more,
Then they whom youth and ease have taught to gloss,
More are men's ends marked, then their lives before,
The setting Sun, and Music is the close
As the last taste of sweetes, is sweetest last,
Writ in remembrance, more then things long past;
Though Richard my lives counsel would not hear,
My deaths sad tale, may yet vndeafe his ear.

No, it is stopped with other flattering sounds
As praises of his state: then there are sound
Lasc^ious Meeters* to whose venom sound
The open ear of youth does always listen.
Report of fashions in proud Italy,
Whose: manners still our tardie apish Nation
Limpes after in base imitation.
Where does the world thrust forth a vanity,
So it be new, there is no respect how vile,
That is not quickly buz'd into his ears?
That all too late comes counsel to be heard,
Where will does mutiny with wits regard:
Direct not him, whose way himself will choose,
It Is breath thou lackst, and that breath will thou loose.

Me thinks I am a Prophet new inspired,
And thus expiring, do foretell of him,
His rash fierce blaze of Riot cannot last,
For violent fires soon burn out themselves,
Small showers last long, but sudden storms are short,
He tyres betimes, that spurs too fast betimes;
With eager feeding, food does choke the feeder:
Light vanity, insatiate cormorant,
Consuming means soon preyes upon it self.
This royal Throne of Kings, this sceptred Isle,
This earth of Majesty, this seat of Mars,
This other Eden, demi paradise,
This Fortress built by Nature for her self,
Against infection, and the hand of war:
This happy breed of men, this little world,
This precious stone, set in the silver sea,
Which serves it in the office of a wall,
Or as a Moate defensive to a house,
Against the envy of less happier Lands,
This blessed plot, this earth, this Realm, this England,
This Nurse, this teeming womb of Royal Kings,
Feared by their breed, and famous for their birth,
Renowned for their deeds, as far from home,
For Christian service, and true Chivalry,
As is the sepulcher in stubborn Jury
Of the Worlds ransom, blessed Mary's Son.
This Land of such dear souls, this deere-deere Land,
Dear for her reputation through the world,
Is now Leas'd out (I dye pronouncing it)
Like to a Tenement or pelting Farm.
England bound in with the triumphant sea,
Whose rocky shore beats back the envious siedge
Of watery Neptune, is now bound in with shame,
With Inky blottes, and rotten Parchment bonds.
That England, that was wont to conquer others,
Has made a shameful conquest of it self.
Ah! would the scandal vanish with my life,
How happy then were my ensuing death?

The King is come, deal mildly with his youth,
For young hot Colts, being raged, do rage the more.

How fares our noble Uncle Lancaster?


What comfort man? How is it with aged Gaunt?


Oh how that name befits my composition:
Old Gaunt indeed, and gaunt in being old:
Within me grief has kept a tedious fast,
And who abstaynes from meat, that is not gaunt?
For sleeping England long time have I watched,
Watching breeds leanness, leanness is all gaunt.
The pleasure that some Fathers feed upon,
Is my strict fast, I mean my Childrens looks,
And therein fasting, have thou made me gaunt:
Gaunt am I for the grave, gaunt as a grave,
Whose hollow womb inherits naught but bones.

Can sick men play so nicely with their names?


No, misery makes sport to mock it self:
Since thou do seek to kill my name in mec,
I mock my name (great King) to flatter thee.

Should dying men flatter those that live?


No, no, men living flatter those that dye.


Thou now a dying, say thou flatter'st me.


Oh no, thou dyest, though I the sicker be.


I am in health, I breath, I see the ^ill.


Now he that made me, knows I see thee ill:
Ill in my self to see, and in thee, seeing ill,
Thy deathbed is no lesser then the Land,
Wherein thou lie in reputation sick,
And thou too care-lesse patient as thou art,
Commit'st thy' anointed body to the cure
Of those Physicians, that first wounded thee.
A thousand flatterers sit within thy Crown,
Whose compass is no bigger then thy head,
And yet incaged in so small a Verge,
The waste is no whit lesser then thy Land:
Oh had thy Grandsire with a Prophets eye,
Seen how his sons son, should destroy his sons,
From forth thy reach he would have laid thy shame,
Deposing thee before thou were possessed,
Which art possessed now to depose thy self.
Why (Cosine) were thou Regent of the world,
It were a shame to let his Land by lease:
But for thy world enjoying but this Land,
Is it not more then shame, to shame it so?
Landlord of England art thou, and not King:
Thy state of Law, is bondslaue to the law,
And --

And thou, a lunaticke leane-witted fool,
Presuming on an Agues privilege,
Dare with thy frozen admonition
Make pale our cheek, chafing the Royal blood
With fury, from his native residence?
Now by my Seats right Royal Majesty,
Were thou not Brother to great Edwards son,
This tongue that runs so roundly in thy head,
Should run thy head from thy vnreuerent shoulders.

Oh spare me not, my brothers Edwards son,
For that I was his Father Edwards son:
That blood already (like the Pelican)
Thou have tapt out, and drunkenly carows'd.
My brother Gloucester, plain well meaning soul
(Whom fair befall in heaven amongst happy souls)
May be a president, and witness good,
That thou respect'st not spilling Edwards blood:
Toyne with the present sickness that I have,
And thy unkindness be like crooked age,
To crop at once a too-long withered flower.
Live in thy shame, but dye not shame with thee,
These words hereafter, thy tormentors be.
Convey me to my bed, then to my grave,
Love they to live, that love and honor have.

And let them dye, that age and sullens have,
For both have thou, and both become the grave.

I do beseech your Majesty impute his words
To wayward sickliness, and age in him:
He loves you on my life* and holds you dear
As Harry Duke of Herford, were he here.

Right, you say true: as Herfords love, so his;
As theirs, so mine: and all be as it is.

My Liege, old Gaunt commends him to your Majesty.


What says he?


Nay nothing, all is said:
His tongue is now a stringlesse instrument,
Words, life, and all, old Lancaster has spent.

Be York the next, that must be bankrupt so,
Though death be poor, it ends a mortal woe.

The ripest fruit first falls, and so does he,
His time is spent, our pilgrimage must be:
So much for that. Now for our Irish wars,
We must supplant those rough rug-headed Kernes,
Which live like venom, where no venom else
But only they, have privilege to live.
And for these great affairs do ask some charge*
Toward our assistance, we do seize to us
The plate, coin, reuennewes, and moueables,
Whereof our Uncle Gaunt did stand possessed.

How long shall I be patient? Oh how long
Shall tender duty make me suffer wrong?
Not Glousters death, nor Herfords banishment,
Nor Gauntes rebukes, nor Englands private wrongs,
Nor the prevention of poor Bullingbrooke,
About his marriage, nor my own disgrace
Have ever made me sour my patient cheek,
Or bend one wrin^kle on my Sovereigns face:
I am the last of noble Edwards sons,
Of whom thy Father Prince of Wales was first,
In war was never Lion raged more fierce:
In peace, was never gentle Lamb more mild,
Then was that young and Princely Gentleman,
His face thou have, for even so looked he
Accomplished with the number of thy how^rs:
But when he frowned, it was against the French,
And not against his friends: h^s noble hand
Did w^n what he did spend: and spent not that
Which his triumphant fathers hand had won:
His hands were guilty of no kindreds blood,
But bloody with the enemies of his kin:
Oh Richard York is too far gone with grief,
Or else he never would compare between.

Why Uncle,
What Is the matter?

Oh my Liege, pardon me if you please, if not
I pleased not to be pardoned, am content with all:
Seek you to seize, and gripe into your hands
The Royalties and Rights of banished Herfo^d?
Is not Gaunt dead? and does not Herford live?
Was not Gaunt just? and is not ^arry true?
Did not the one deserve to have an heir?
Is not his heir a well-deseruing son?
Take Herfords rights away, and take from time
His Charters, and his customarie rights:
Let not to morrow then ensue to day,
Be not thy self. For how art thou a King
But by fair sequence and succession?
Now before God, God forbid I say true,
If you do wrongfully seize Herfords right,
Call in his Letters Patents that he has
By his Atturneyes general, to sue
His Liuerie, and deny his offered homage,
You pluck a thousand ^angers on your head,
You loose a thousand well-disposed hearts,
And prick my tender patience to those thoughts
Which honor and allegiance cannnot think.

Think what you will: we sei^e into our hands,
His plate, his goods, his money, and his lands.

I Will no^ be by the while: My Liege farewell,
What will ensue hereof, there is none can tell.
But by bad cou^ses may be understood,
That their events can never fall out good.

Go Bushie to the Earl of Wiltshire straight,
Bid him repair to us to Ely house,
To see this business: to morrow next
We will for Ireland, and it is time, I trow:
And we create in absence of our self
Our Uncle York, Lord Governor of England:
For he is just, and always lou^d us well.
Come on out Queen, to morrow must we part,
Be merry, for our time of stay is short.

Well Lords, the Duke of Lancaster is dead.


And living too, for now his son is Duke.


Barely in title, not in reuennew.


Richly in both, if justice had her right.


My heart is great: but it must break with silence,
Er't be disburthen'd with a liberal tongue.

Nay speak thy mind: and let him never speak more
That speaks thy words again to do thee harm.

Tends that thou would speak to the Du* of Hereford,
If it be so, out with it boldly man,
Quick is mine ear to hear of good toward him.

No good at all that I can do for him,
Unless you call it good to pity him,
Berest and gelded of his patrimony.

Now before heaven, it is shame such wrongs are borne,
In him a royal Prince, and many more
Of noble blood in this declining Land;
The King is not himself, but basely led
By Flatterers, and what they will inform
Merely in hate against any of us all,
That will the King severely prosecute
Against us, our lives, our children, and our heirs.

The Commons has he pil'd with grievous taxes
And quite lost their hearts: the Nobles has he find
For ancient quarrels, and quite lost their hearts.

And daily new ex^ctions are devised,
As blankes* beneuolences, and I wot not what:
But what of Gods name does become of this?

Wars has not wasted it, for war'd he has not.
But basely yielded upon comprimize,
That which his Ancestors atchieu'd with blows:
More has he spent in peace, then they in wars.

The Earl of Wiltshire has the realm in Farm.


The Kings grown bankrupt like a broken man.


Reproach, and dissolution hangs over him.


He has not money for these Irish wars:
(His burthenous taxations notwithstanding)
But by the robbing of the banished Duke.

His noble Kinsman, most degenerate King:
But Lords, we hear this fearful tempest sing,
Yet seek no shelter to avoid the storm:
We see the wind sit sore upon our salles,
And yet we strike not, but securely perish

We see the very wrack that we must suffer,
And ^auoyded is the danger now
For ^irst^ng so the causes of our wrack.

Not so: even through the hollow eyes of death,
I sp^ life peering: but I dare not say
How near the tidings of our comfort is.

Nay let us share thy thoughts, as thou do ours

Be confident to speak Northumberland,
We three, are but thy self, and speaking so,
Thy words are but as thoughts, therefore be bold.

Then thus: I have from Port le Blan
A Bay in Britain, received intelligence,
That Harry Duke of Herford, Rainald Lord Cobham,
That late broke from the Duke of Exeter,
His brother Archbishop, late of Canterbury,
Sir Thomas Erpingham Sir John Rainston,
Sir John Norberie, Sir Robert W^terton, and Francis Quoint,
All these well furnished by the Duke of Britain,
With eight tall ships, three thousand men of war
Are making hither with all due expedience,
And shortly mean to touch our Northern shore:
Perhaps they had ere this, but that they stay
The first departing of the King for Ireland.
If then we shall shake off our slavish yoke,
Impe out our drooping Countries broken wing,
Redeem from broaking pawn the blemished Crown,
Wipe off the dust that hides our Scepters gilt,
And make high Majesty look like it self,
Away with me in post to Rauenspurgh,
But if you faint, as fearing to do so,
Stay, and be secret, and my self will go.

To horse, to horse, urge doubts to them yt fear.


Hold out my horse, and I will first be there.


Madam, your Majesty is too much sad,
You promised when you parted with the King,
To lay aside selfe-harming heaviness,
And entertain a cheerful disposition.

To please the King, I did: to please my self
I cannot do it: yet I know no cause
Why I should welcome such a guest as grief,
Save bidding farewell to so sweet a guest
As my sweet Richard; yet again me thinks,
Some unborn sorrow, ripe in fortunes womb
Is coming toward me, and my inward soul
With nothing trembles, at something it greeues,
More then with parting from my Lord the King.

Each substance of a grief has twenty shadows
Which shows like grief it self, but is not so:
For sorrows eye, glazed with blinding tears,
Diuides one thing entire, to many objects,
Like perspectiues, which rightly gazed upon
Show nothing but confusion, eyed awry,
Distinguish form: so your sweet Majesty
Looking awry upon your Lords departure,
Find shapes of grief, more then himself to wail,
Which looked on as it is, is naught but shadows
Of what it is not: then thrice-gracious Queen,
More then your Lords departure weep not, more's not seen;
Or if it be, it is with false sorrows eye,
Which for things true, weep things imaginary.

It may be so: but yet my inward soul
Persuades me it is otherwise: how ere it be,
I cannot but be sad: so heavy sad,
As though on thinking on no thought I think,
^akes me with heavy nothing faint and shrink.

It Is nothing but conceit (my gracious Lady.)

It Is nothing less: conceit is still derived
From some fore father grief, mine is not so,
For nothing has begot my something grief,
Or something, has the nothing that I grieve,
It Is in reuersion that I do possess,
But what it is, that is not yet known, what
I cannot name, it is namelesse woe I wot.

Heaven save your Majesty, and well met Gentlemen:
I hope the King is not yet shipped for Ireland.

Why hop'st thou so? It Is better hope he is:
For his designs crave have, his have good hope,
Then wherefore do thou hope he is not shipped?

That he our hope, might have retired his power,
and driven into despair an enemies hope,
Who strongly has set footing in this Land.
The banished Bullingbrooke repeales himself,
And with vp-lifted Arms is safe arrived
At Rauenspurg.

Now God in heaven forbid.


O Madam it is too true: and that is worse,
The L. Northumberland, his young son Henry Percie,
The Lords of Rosse, Beaumond, and Willoughby,
With all their powrefull friends are fled to him.

Why have you not proclaimed Northumberland
And the rest of the revolted faction, Traitors?

We have: where upon the Earl of Worcester
Has broke his staff, resigned his Stewardship,
And all the household servant, fled with him to Bullinbrook

So Green, thou art the midwife of my woe,
And Bullinbrooke my sorrows dismal heir:
Now has my soul brought forth her prodegie,
And I a gasping new delivered mother,
Have woe to woe, sorrow to sorrow joined.

Despair not Madam.


Who shall hinder me?
I will despair, and be at enmity
With couzening hope; he is a Flatterer,
A Parasite, a keeper back of death,
Who gently would dissolve the bands of life,
Which false hopes linger in extremity.

Here comes the Duke of York.


With signs of war about his aged neck,
Oh full of careful business are his looks:
Uncle* for heavens sake speak comfortable words:

Comfort's in heaven, and we are on the earth,
Where nothing lives but crosses, care and grief:
Your husband he is gone to sail far off,
Whilst others come to make him loose at home:
Here am I left to underprop his Land,
Who weak with age, cannot support my self:
Now comes the sick hour that his surfeit made,
Now shall he try his friends that flattered him.

My Lord, your son was gone before I came.


He was: why so: go all which way it will*
The Nobles they are fled, the Commons they are cold,
And will I fear revolt on Herfords side.
Sir, get thee to Plathie to my sister Gloucester,
Bid her send me presently a thousand pound,
Hold, take my Ring.

My Lord, I had forgot
To tell your Lordship, to day I came by, and called there,
But ^ shall grieve you to report the rest.

What is it knave?


An hour before I came, the Duchess di'de.


Heaven for his mercy, what a tide of woes
Come rushing on this woeful Land at once?
I know not what to do: I would to heaven
(So my untruth had not prouok'd him to it)
The King had cut off my head with my brothers.
What, are there posts dispatched for Ireland?
How shall we do for money for these wars?
Come sister (Cozen I would say) pray pardon me.
Go fellow, get thee home, poouide some Carts,
And bring away the Armor that is there.
Gentlemen, will you muster men?
If I know how, or which way to order these affairs
Thus disorderly thrust into my hands,
Never believe me. Both are my kinsmen,
The one is my Sovereign, whom both my oath
And duty bids defend: the other again
Is my kinsman, whom the King has wronged,
Whom conscience, and my kindred bids to right:
Well, somewhat we must do: Come Cozen,
I Will dispose of you. Gentlemen, go muster up your men,
And meet me presently at Barkley Castle:
I should to Plashy too: but time will not permit,
All is uneven, and every thing is left at six and seven.

The wind sits fair for news to go to Ireland,
But none returns: For us to leuy power
Proportionable to the enemy, is all impossible.

Besides our neerenesse to the King in love,
Is near the hate of those love not the King.

And that is the wavering Commons, for their love
Lies in their purses, and who so empties them,
By so much fills their hearts with deadly hate.

Wherein the king stands generally condemned


If judgment lie in them, then so do we,
Because we have been ever near the King.

Well: I will for refuge straight to Bristoll Castle,
The Earl of Wiltshire is already there.

Thither will I with you, for little office
Will the hateful Commons perform for us,
Except like Curres, to tear us all in pieces:
Will you go along with us?

No; I will to Ireland to his Majesty:
Farewell, if hearts presages be not vain,
We three here part, that neu'r shall meet again.

That Is as York thriues to beat back Bullinbroke


Alas poor Duke, the task he undertakes
I^ numbering sands, and drinking Oceans dry,
Where one on his side sights, thousands will fly.

Farewell at once, for once, for all, and ever.
Well, we may meet again.

I fear me never.

How far is it my Lord to Berkley now?


Believe me noble Lord,
I am a stranger here in Gloustershire,
These high wild h^lles, and rough uneven ways,
Draws out our miles, and makes them wearisome:
And yet our fair discourse has been as sugar,
Making the hard way sweet and delectable:
But ^ bethink me, what a weary way
From Rauenspurgh to Cottshold will be found,
In Rosse and Willoughby, wanting your company,
Which I protest has very much beguild
The tediousness, and process of my travel:
But theirs is sweetened with the hope to have
The present benefit that I possess;
And hope to joy, is little less in joy,
Then hope enjoyed: By this, the weary Lords
Shall make their way seem short, as m^ne has done,
By sight of what I have, your Noble Company.

Of much less value is my Company,
Then your good words: but who comes here?

It is my Son, young Harry Percie,
Sent from my Brother Worcester: Whence soever.
Harry, how fares your Uncle?

I had thought, my Lord, to have learned his health of you.


Why, is he not with the Queen?


No, my good Lord, he has forsook the Court,
Broken his Staff of Office, and dispersed
The Household of the King.

What was his reason?
He was not so resolved, when we last spoke together.

Because your Lordship was proclaimed Traitor.
But he, my Lord, is gone to Rauenspurgh,
To offer service to the Duke of Hereford,
And sent me over by Barkely, to discover
What power the Duke of York had levied there,
Then with direction to repair to Rauenspurgh.

Have you forgot the Duke of Hereford (Boy.)


No, my good Lord; for that is not forgot
Which never I did remember: to my knowledge,
I never in my life did look on him.

Then learn to know him now: this is the Duke.


My gracious Lord, I tender you my service,
Such as it is, being render* raw, and young,
Which elder days shall ripen and confirm
To more approved service, and desert.

I thank thee gentle Percie, and be sure
I count my self in nothing else so happy.
As in a Soul remembering my good Friends:
And as my Fortune ripens with thy Love,
It shall be still thy true Loves recompense,
My Heart this Covenant makes, my Hand thus seals it.

How far is it to Barkely? and what stir
Keeps good old York there, with his Men of War?

There stands the Castle, by yond tuft of Trees,
Manned with three hundred men, as I have heard,
And in it are the Lords of York, Barkely, and Seymor,
None else of Name, and noble estimate.

Here con n^ the Lords of Rosse and Willoughby,
Bloody with spurring, si^ red with hasle.

Welcome my Lords, I wot your love pursues
A banished Pray^ (...) my Treasury
(...) that vasel (...), which more enrich^d,
Shall be your love, and lab was recompense.

Your presence makes us rich, most Noble Lord.


And sure surmounts our labor to attain it.


Evermore thanks, the Exchequer of the poor,
Which till my infant-fortune comes to years,
Stands for my Bounty: but who comes here?

It is my Lord of Barkely, as I guess.


My Lord of Hereford, my Message is to you.


My Lord, my Answer is to Lancaster,
And I am come to seek that Name in England,
And I must find that Title in your Tongue,
Before I make reply to aught you say.

Mistake me not, my Lord, it is not my meaning
To raze one Title of your Honor out.
To you, my Lord, I come (what Lord you will)
From the most glorious of this Land,
The Duke of York, to know what pricks you on
To take advantage of the absent time,
And fright our Native Peace with selfe-borne Arms.

I shall not need transport my words by you,
Here comes his Grace in Person. My Noble Uncle.

Show me thy humble heart, and not thy knee,
Whose duty is deceiuable, and false.

My gracious Uncle.


Tut, tut, Grace me no Grace, nor Uncle me,
I am no Traitors Uncle; and that word Grace,
In an ungracious mouth, is but profane.
Why have these banished, and forbidden Legs,
Dared once to touch a Dust of Englands Ground?
But more then why, why have they dared to march
So many miles upon her peaceful Bosom,
Frighting her pale-faced Villages with War,
And oftentation of despised Arms?
Come thou because the anointed King is hence?
Why foolish Boy, the King is left behind,
And in my loyal Bosom lies his power.
Were I bu^ now the Lord of such hot youth,
A^ when brave Gaunt, thy Father, and my self
Rescued the Black Prince, that young Mars of men,
From forth the Ranks of many thousand French:
Oh then, how quickly should this Arm of mine,
Now Prisoner to the Palsy, chastise thee,
And minister correction to thy Fault.

My gracious Uncle, let me know my Fault,
On what Condition stands it, and wherein?

Even in Condition of the worst degree,
In gross Rebellion, and detested Treason:
Thou art a banished man, and here art come
Before the expiration of thy time,
In brauing Atm^s against thy Sovereign.

As I was banished, I was banished Hereford,
But as I come, I come for Lancaster.
And Noble Uncle, I beseech your Grace
Look on my Wrongs with an indifferent eye:
You are my Father, for me thinks in you
I see old Gaunt alive. Oh then my Father,
Will you permit, that I shall stand condemned
A wandering Vagabond; my Rights and Royalties
Plucked from my arms ^erforce, and given away
To vpstart Unthrifts? Wherefore was I borne?
If that my Cousin King, be King of England,
It must be granted, I am Duke of Lancaster.
You have a Son, Aumerle, my Noble Kinsman,
Had you first died, and he been thus trod down,
He should have found his Uncle Gaunt a Father,
To rowze his Wrongs, and chase them to the bay.
I am denyde to sue my Liuerie here,
And yet my Letters Patents give me leave:
My Fathers goods are all distraynd* and sold,
And these, and all, are all amiss imployd.
What would you have me do? I am a Subject,
And challenge Law: Attorneyes are denied me;
And therefore personally I lay my claim
To my Inheritance of free Descent.

The Noble Duke has been too much abused.


It stands your Grace upon, to do him right.


Base men by his endowments are made great.


My Lords of England, let me tell you this,
I have had feeling of my Cosens Wrongs,
And labored all I could to do him right:
But in this kind, to come in brauing Arms,
Be his own Caruer, and cut out his way,
To find out Right with Wrongs, it may not be;
And you that do abett him in this kind,
Cher^sh Rebellion, and are Rebels all.

The Noble Duke has sworn his coming is
But for his own; and for the right of that,
We all have strongly sworn to give him aid,
And let him neu'r see Joy, that breaks that Oath.

Well, well, I see the issue of these Arms,
I cannot mend it, I must needs confess,
Because my power is weak, and all ill left:
But if I could, by him that gave me life,
I would attach you all, and make you stoop
Unto the Sovereign Mercy of the King.
But since I cannot, be it known to you,
I do remain as Neuter. So fare you well,
Unless you please to enter in the Castle,
And there repose you for this Night.

An offer Uncle, that we will accept:
But we must win your Grace to go with us
To Bristow Castle, which they say is held
By Bushie, Bagot, and their Accomplices,
The Caterpillars of the Commonwealth,
Which I have sworn to weed, and pluck away.

It may be I will go with you: but yet I Will pawse,
For I am loath to break our Countries Laws:
Nor Friends, nor Foes, to me welcome you are,
Things past redress, are now with me past care.

My Lord of Salisbury, we have stayed ten days,
And hardly kept our Countrymen together,
And yet we hear no tidings from the King;
Therefore we will disperse our selves: farewell.

Stay yet another day, thou trusty Welchman,
The King reposeth all his confidence in thee.

It Is thought the King is dead, we will not stay;
The Bay-trees in our Country all are withered,
And Meteors fright the fixed Stars of Heaven;
The pale-faced Moon looks bloody on the Earth,
And leane-look'd Prophets whisper fearful change;
Rich men look sad, and Ruffians dance and leap,
The one in fear, to loose what they enjoy,
The other to enjoy by Rage, and War:
These signs fore-run the death of Kings.
Farewell, our Countrymen are gone and fled;
As well assured Richard their King is dead.

Ah Richard, with eyes of heavy mind,
I see thy Glory, like a shooting Star,
Fall to the base Earth, from the Firmament:
Thy Sun sets weeping in the lowly West,
Witnessing Storms to come, Woe, and Unrest:
Thy Friends are fled, to wait upon thy Foes,
And crossely to thy good, all fortune goes.

Bring forth these men:
Bushie and Green, I will not vex your souls,
(Since presently your souls must part your bodies)
With too much urging your pernicious lives,
For 'twere no Charity: yet to wash your blood
From off my hands, here in the view of men,
I will unfold some causes of your deaths.
You have misled a Prince, a Royal King,
A happy Gentleman in Blood, and Lineaments,
By you vnhappied, and disfigured clean:
You have in manner with your sinful hours
Made a Divorce betwixt his Queen and him,
Broke the possession of a Royal Bed,
And stayn'd the beauty of a fair Queens Cheeks,
With tears drawn from her eyes, with your foul wrongs.
My self a Prince, by fortune of my birth,
Near to the King in blood, and near in love,
Till you did make him mis-interprete me,
Have stoopt my neck under your injuries,
And sighed my English breath in foreign Clouds,
Eating the bitter bread of banishment;
While you have fed upon my Seignories,
Dis-park'd my Parkes, and felled my Forest Woods;
From mine own Windows torn my Household Coat,
Razed out my Impresse, leaving me no sign,
Save men's opinions, and my living blood,
To show the World I am a Gentleman.
This, and much more, much more then twice all this,
Condemns you to the death: see them delivered over
To execution, and the hand of death.

More welcome is the stroke of death to me,
Then Bullingbrooke to England.

My comfort is, that Heaven will take our souls,
And plague Injustice with the pains of Hell.

My Lord Northumberland, see them dispatched:
Uncle, you say the Queen is at your House,
For Heavens sake fairly let her be entreated,
Tell her I send to her my kind commends;
Take special care my Greetings be delivered.

A Gentleman of mine I have dispatched
With Letters of your love, to her at large.

Thanks gentle Uncle: come Lords away,
To fight with Glendoure, and his Accomplices;
A while to work, and after holliday.

Barkloughly Castle call you this at hand?


Yea, my Lord: how brook: your Grace the air,
After your late tossing on the breaking Seas?

Needs must I like it well: I weep for joy
To stand upon my Kingdom once again.
Dear Earth, I do salute thee with my hand,
Though Rebels wound thee with their Horses hoofes:
As a long parted Mother with her Child,
Plays fondly with her tears, and smiles in meeting;
So weeping, smiling, greet I thee my Earth,
And do thee favor with my Royal hands.
Feed not thy Sovereigns Foe, my gentle Earth,
Nor with thy Sweetes, comfort his ravenous sense:
But let thy Spiders, that suck up thy Venom,
And heauie-gated Toades lie in their way,
Doing annoyance to the treacherous feet,
Which with usurping steps do trample thee.
Yield stinging Nettles to mine Enemies;
And when they from thy Bosom pluck a Flower,
Guard it I prithee with a lurking Adder,
Whose double tongue may with a mortal touch
Throw death upon thy Sovereigns Enemies.
Mock not my senseless Coniuration, Lords;
This Earth shall have a feeling, and these Stones
Prove armed Soldiers, ere her Native King
Shall falter under foul Rebellious Arms.

Fear not my Lord, that Power that made you King
Has power to keep you King, in spite of all.

He means, my Lord, that we are too remiss,
Whilst Bullingbrooke through our security,
Grows strong and great, in substance and in friends.

Discomfortable Cousin, know thou not,
That when the searching Eye of Heaven is hid
Behind the Globe, that lights the lower World,
Then Thieves and Robbers raunge abroad unseen,
In Murders and in Outrage bloody here:
But when from under this Terrestrial Ball
He fires the proud tops of the Eastern Pines,
And darts his Lightning through every guilty hole,
Then Murders, Treasons, and detested sins
(The Cloak of Night being plucked from off their backs)
Stand bare and naked, trembling at themselves.
So when this Thief, this Traitor Bullingbrooke,
Who all this while has reuell'd in the Night,
Shall see us rising in our Throne, the East,
His Treasons will sit blushing in his face,
Not able to endure the sight of Day;
But selfe-affrighted, tremble at his sin.
Not all the Water in the rough rude Sea
Can wash the Balm from an anointed King;
The breath of worldly men cannot depose
The Deputy elected by the Lord:
For every man that Bullingbrooke has pressed,
To lift shrewd Steel against our Golden Crown,
Heaven for his Richard has in heavenly pay
A glorious Angel: then if Angels fight,
Weak men must fall, for Heaven still guards the right.
Welcome my Lord, how far off lies your Power?

Nor near, nor farther off, my gracious Lord,
Then this weak arm; discomfort guides my tongue,
And bids me speak of nothing but despair:
One day too late, I fear (my Noble Lord)
Has clouded all thy happy days on Earth:
Oh call back Yesterday, bid Time return,
And thou shall have twelve thousand fighting men:
To day, to day, unhappy day too late
Orethrowes thy Joys, Friends, Fortune, and thy State;
For all the Welchmen hearing thou were dead,
Are gone to Bullingbrooke, dispersed, and fled.

Comfort my Liege, why looks your Grace so pale?


But now the blood of twenty thousand men
Did triumph in my face, and they are fled,
And till so much blood thither come again,
Have I not reason to look pale, and dead?
All Souls that will be safe, fly from my side,
For Time has set a blot upon my pride.

Comfort my Liege, remember who you are.


I had forgot my self. Am I not King?
Awake thou sluggard Majesty, thou sleep:
Is not the Kings Name forty thousand Names?
Arm, arm my Name: a punie subject strikes
At thy great glory. Look not to the ground,
Ye Favorites of a King: are we not high?
High be our thoughts: I know my Uncle York
Ha^h Power enough to serve our turn.
But who comes here?

More health and happiness betide my Liege,
Then can my care-tun'd tongue deliver him

Mine ear is open, and my heart prepared:
The worst is worldly loss, thou can unfold:
Say, Is my Kingdom loft? why 'twas my Care:
And what loss is it to be rid of Care?
Strives Bullingbrooke to be as Great as we?
Greater he shall not be: If he serve God,
We Will serve him too, and be his Fellow so.
Revolt our Subjects? That we cannot mend,
They break their Faith to God, as well as us:
Cry Woe, Destruction, Ruin, Loss, Decay,
The worst is Death, and Death will have his day.

Glad am I, that your Highness is so armed
To bear the tidings of Calamity.
Like an unseasonable stormy day,
Which make the Silver Rivers drown their Shores,
As if the World were all dissolved to tears:
So high, above his Limits, swells the Rage
Of Bullingbrooke, covering your fearful Land
With hard bright Steel, and hearts harder then Steel:
White Bears have armed their thin and hairelesse Scalps
Against thy Majesty, and Boys with Women's Voices,
Strive to speak big, and clap their female ioints
In stiff vnw^eldie Arms: against thy Crown
Thy very Beads-men learn to bend their Bows
Of double fatal Eugh: against thy State
Yea Distaffe-Women manage rustie Bills:
Against thy Seat both young and old rebel,
And all goes worse then I have power to tell.

Too well, too well thou tell a Tale so ill.
Where is the Earl of Wiltshire? where is Bagot?
What is become of Bushie? where is Green?
That they have let the dangerous Enemy
Measure our Confines with such peaceful steps?
If we prevail, their heads shall pay for it.
I warrant they have made peace with Bullingbrooke.

Peace have they made with him indeed (my Lord.)


Oh Villains, Vipers, damned without redemption,
Dogs, easily won to fawn on any man,
Snakes in my heart blood-warm'd, that sting my heart,
Three Iudasses, each one thrice worse then Judas,
Would they make peace? terrible Hell make war
Upon their spotted Souls for this Offense.

Sweet Love (I see) changing his property,
Turns to the sowrest, and most deadly hate:
Again vncurse their Souls; their peace is made
With Heads, and not with Hands: those whom you curse
Have felt the worst of Deaths destroying hand,
And lie full low, grau'd in the hollow ground.

Is Bushie Green, and the Earl of Wiltshire dead?


Yea all of them at Bristow lost their heads.


Where is the Duke my Father with his Power?


No matter where; of comfort no man speak:
Let Us talk of Graves, of Worms, and Epitaphs,
Make Dust our Paper, and with Raynie eyes
Write Sorrow on the Bosom of the Earth.
Let Us choose Executors, and talk of Wills:
And yet not so; for what can we bequeath,
Save our deposed bodies to the ground?
Our Lands, our Lives, and all are Bullingbrookes,
And nothing can we call our own, but Death,
And that small Model of the barren Earth,
Which serves as Paste, and Cover to our Bones:
For Heavens sake let us sit upon the ground,
And tell sad stories of the death of Kings:
How some have been deposed, some slain in war,
Some haunted by the Ghosts they have deposed,
Some poisoned by their Wives, some sleeping killed,
All murdered. For within the hollow Crown
That rounds the mortal Temples of a King,
Keeps Death his Court, and there the Antique sits
Scoffing his State, and grinning at his Pomp,
Allowing him a breath, a little Scene,
To Monarchize, be feared, and kill with looks,
Infusing him with self and vain conceit,
As if this Flesh, which walls about our Life,
Were Brass impregnable: and humor'd thus,
Comes at the last, and with a little Pin
Bores through his Castle Walls, and farewell King.
Cover your heads, and mock not flesh and blood
With solemn Reverence: throw away Respect,
Tradition, Form, and Ceremonious duty,
For you have but mistook me all this while:
I live with Bread like you, feel Want,
Taste Grief, need Friends: subjected thus,
How can you say to me, I am a King?

My Lord, wise men never wail their present woes,
But presently prevent the ways to wail:
To fear the Foe, since fear oppresses strength,
Gives in your weakness, strength unto your Foe;
Fear, and be slain, no worse can come to fight,
And fight and die, is death destroying death,
Where fearing, dying, pays death servile breath.

My Father has a Power, enquire of him,
And learn to make a Body of a Limb.

Thou chid'st me well: proud Bullingbrooke I come
To change Blows with thee, for our day of Doom:
This ague fit of fear is ouer-blowne,
An easy task it is to win our own.
Say Scroope, where lies our Uncle with his Power?
Speak sweetly man, although thy looks be sour.

Men judge by the complexion of the Sky
The state and inclination of the day;
So may you by my dull and heavy Eye:
My Tongue has but a heavier Tale to say:
I play the Torturer, by small and small
To lengthen out the worst, that must be spoken.
Your Uncle York is joined with Bullingbrooke,
And all your Northern Castles yielded up,
And all your Southern Gentlemen in Arms
Upon his Faction.

Thou have said enough.
Beshrew thee Cousin, which did lead me forth
Of that sweet way I was in, to despair:
What say you now? What comfort have we now?
By Heaven I Will hate him everlastingly.
That bids me be of comfort any more.
Go to Flint Castle, there I Will pine away,
A King, Woes slave, shall Kingly Woe obey:
That Power I have, discharge, and let 'em go
To ear the Land, that has some hope to grow,
For I have none. Let no man speak again
To alter this, for counsel is but vain.

My Liege, one word.


He does me double wrong,
That wounds me with the flatteries of his tongue.
Discharge my followers: let them hence away,
From Richards Night, to Bullingbrookes fair Day.

So that by this intelligence we learn
The Welchmen are dispersed, and Salisbury
Is gone to meet the King, who lately landed
With some few private friends, upon this Coast.

The news is very fair and good, my Lord, Richard, not far from hence, has
hid his head


It would beseem the Lord Northumberland,
To say King Richard: alack the heavy day,
When such a sacred King should hide his head.

Your Grace mistakes: only to be brief,
Left I his Title out.

The time has been,
Would you have been so brief with him, he would
Have been so brief with you, to shorten you,
For taking so the Head, your whole heads length.

Mistake not (Uncle) farther then you should.


Take not (good Cousin) farther then you should.
Least you mistake the Heavens are ore your head.

I know it (Uncle) and oppose not my self
Against their will. But who comes here?
Welcome Harry: what, will not this Castle yield?

The Castle royally is manned, my Lord,
Against thy entrance.

Royally? Why, it contains no King?


Yes (my good Lord)
It does contain a King: King Richard lies
Within the limits of yond Lime and Stone,
And with him, the Lord Aumerle, Lord Salisbury,
Sir Stephen Scroope, besides a Clergy man
Of holy reverence; who, I cannot learn.

Oh, belike it is the Bishop of Carl^le.


Noble Lord,
Go to the rude Ribs of that ancient Castle,
Through Brazen Trumpet send the breath of Parle
Into his ruined Ears, and thus deliver:
Henry Bullingbrooke upon his knees does kiss
King Richards hand, and sends allegiance
And true faith of heart to his Royal Person: hither come
Even at his feet, to lay my Arms and Power,
Provided, that my Banishment repealed,
And Lands restored again, be freely granted:
If not, I Will use the advantage of my Power,
And lay the Summers dust with showers of blood,
Rayn'd from the wounds of slaughtered Englishmen;
The which, how far off from the mind of Bullingbrooke
It is, such Crimson Tempest should bedrench
The fresh green Lap of fair King Richards Land,
My stooping duty tenderly shall show.
Go signify as much, while here we march
Upon the Grassie Carpet of this Plain:
Let Us march without the noise of threatening Drum,
That from this Castles tattered Battlements
Our fair Appointments may be well perused.
Me thinks King Richard and my self should meet
With no less terror then the Elements
Of Fire and Water, when their thundering smoke
At meeting tears the cloudie Cheeks of Heaven:
Be he the fire, I Will be the yielding Water;
The Rage be his, while on the Earth I rain
My Waters on the Earth, and not on him.
March on, and mark King Richard how he looks.
See, see, King Richard does himself appear
As does the blushing discontented Sun,
From out the fiery Portall of the East,
When he perceiues the envious Clouds are bent
To dim his glory, and to stain the tract
Of his bright passage to the Occident.

Yet looks he like a King: behold his Eye
(As bright as is the Eagles) lightens forth
Controlling Majesty: alack, alack, for woe,
That any harm should stain so fair a show.

We are amazed, and thus long have we stood
To watch the fearful bending of thy knee,
Because we thought our self thy lawful King:
And if we be, how dare thy joints forget
To pay their awful duty to our presence?
If we be not, show us the Hand of God,
That has dismissed us from our Stewardship,
For well we know, no Hand of Blood and Bone
Can gripe the sacred Handle of our Scepter,
Unless he do profane, steal, or usurp.
And though you think, that all, as you have done,
Have torn their Souls, by turning them from us,
And we are barren, and bereft of Friends:
Yet know, my Master, God Omnipotent,
Is mustring in his Clouds, on our behalf,
Armies of Pestilence, and they shall strike
Your Children yet unborn, and vnbegot,
That lift your Vassal Hands against my Head,
And threat the Glory of my precious Crown.
Tell Bullingbrooke, for yond me thinks he is,
That every stride he makes upon my Land,
Is dangerous Treason: He is come to open
The purple Testament of bleeding War;
But ere the Crown he looks for, live in peace,
Ten thousand bloody crowns of Mothers Sons
Shall ill become the flower of Englands face,
Change the complexion of her Maid-pale Peace
To Scarlet Indignation, and bedew
Her Pastors Grass with faithful English Blood.

The King of Heaven forbid our Lord the King
Should so with civil and uncivil Arms
Be rushed upon: Thy thrice-noble Cousin,
Harry Bullingbrooke, does humbly kiss thy hand,
And by the Honorable Tomb he swears,
That stands upon your Royal Grandsires Bones,
And by the Royalties of both your Bloods,
(Currents that spring from one most gracious Head)
And by the buried Hand of Warlike Gaunt,
And by the Worth and Honor of himself,
Comprising all that may be sworn, or said,
His coming hither has no further scope,
Then for his Lineall Royalties, and to beg
Infranchisement immediate on his knees:
Which on thy Royal party granted once,
His glittering Arms he will commend to' Rust,
His barbed Steedes to Stables, and his heart
To faithful service of your Majesty:
This swears he, as he is a Prince, is just,
And as I am a Gentleman, I credit him.

Northumberland, say thus: The King returns,
His Noble Cousin is right welcome hither,
And all the number of his fair demands
Shall be accomplished without contradiction:
With all the gracious utterance thou have,
Speak to his gentle hearing kind commends,
We do debase our self (Cousin) do we not,
To look so poorly, and to speak so fair?
Shall we call back Northumberland, and send
Defiance to the Traitor, and so die?

No, good my Lord, let us fight with gentle words,
Till tune lend friends, and friends their helpeful Swords.

Oh God, oh God, that ere this tongue of mine,
That laid the Sentence of dread Banishment
On yond proud man, should take it off again
With words of sooth: Oh that I were as great
As is my Grief, or lesser then my Name,
Or that I could forget what I have been,
Or not remember what I must be now:
Swell'st thou proud heart? I Will give thee scope to beat,
Since Foes have scope to beat both thee and me.

Northumberland comes back from Bullingbrooke.


What must the King do now? must he submit?
The King shall do it: Must he be deposed?
The King shall be contented: Must he loose
The Name of King? of Gods Name let it go.
I Will give my Jewels for a set of Beads,
My gorgeous Palace, for a Hermitage,
My gay Apparel, for an Almes-mans Gown,
My figured Goblets, for a Dish of Wood,
My Scepter, for a Palmers walking Staff,
My Subjects, for a pair of carved Saints,
And my large Kingdom, for a little Grave,
A little little Grave, an obscure Grave.
Or I Will be buried in the Kings highway,
Some way of common Trade, where Subjects feet
May howrely trample on their Sovereigns Head:
For on my heart they tread now, whilst I live;
And buried once, why not upon my Head?
Aumerle, thou weep'st (my tenderhearted Cousin)
We Will make foul Weather with despised Tears:
Our sighs, and they, shall lodge the Summer Corn,
And make a Dearth in this reuolting Land.
Or shall we play the Wantons with our Woes,
And make some pretty Match, with shedding Tears?
As thus: to drop them still upon one place,
Till they have fretted us a pair of Graves,
Within the Earth: and therein laid there lies
Two Kinsmen, dug their Graves with weeping Eyes?
Would not this ill, do well? Well, well, I see
I talk but idly, and you mock at me.
Most mighty Prince, my Lord Northumberland,
What says King Bullingbrooke? Will his Majesty
Give Richard leave to live, till Richard die?
You make a Leg, and Bullingbrooke says I.

My Lord, in the base Court he does attend
To speak with you, may it please you to come down.

Down, down I come, like glist'ring Phaeton,
Wanting the manage of unruly Iades.
In the base Court? base Court, where Kings grow base,
To come at Traitors Calls, and do them Grace.
In the base Court come down: down Court, down King,
For night-Owls shrike, where mou^ting Larks should sing.

What says his Majesty?


Sorrow, and grief of heart
Makes him speak fondly, like a frantic man:
Yet he is come.

Stand all apart,
And show fair duty to his Majesty.
My gracious Lord.

Fair Cousin,
You debase your Princely Knee,
To make the base Earth proud with kissing it.
Me rather had, my Heart might feel your Love,
Then my vnpleas'd Eye see your Courtesy.
Up Cousin, up, your Heart is up, I know,
Thus high at least, although your Knee below.

My gracious Lord, I come but for mine own.


Your own is yours, and I am yours, and all.


So far be mine, my most redoubted Lord,
As my true service shall deserve your love.

Well you deserved:
They well deserve to have,
That know the strong'st, and surest way to get.
Uncle give me your Hand: nay, dry your Eyes,
Tears show their Love, but want their Remedies.
Cousin, I am too young to be your Father,
Though you are old enough to be my Heir.
What you will have, I Will give, and willing to,
For do we must, what force will have us do.
Set on toward London:
Cousin, is it so?

Yea, my good Lord.


Then I must not say, no.


What sport shall we devise here in this Garden,
To drive away the heavy thought of Care?

Madame, we will play at Bowls.


'Twill make me think the World is full of Rubs,
And that my fortune runs against the Byas.

Madame, we will Dance.


My Legs can keep no measure in Delight,
When my poor Heart no measure keeps in Grief.
Therefore no Dancing (Girl) some other sport.

Madame, we will tell Tales.


Of Sorrow, or of Grief?


Of either, Madame.


Of neither, Girl.
For if of Joy, being altogether wanting,
It does remember me the more of Sorrow:
Or if of Grief, being altogether had,
It adds more Sorrow to my want of Joy:
For what I have, I need not to repeat;
And what I want, it boots not to complain.

Madame, I Will sing.


It Is well that thou have cause:
But thou should please me better, would thou weep.

I could weep, Madame, would it do you good.


And I could sing, would weeping do me good,
And never borrow any Tear of thee.
But stay, here comes the Gardiners,
Let Us step into the shadow of these Trees.
My wretchedness, unto a Row of Pinnes,
They Will talk of State: for every one does so,
Against a Change; Woe is fore-runne with Woe.

Go bind thou up yond dangling Apricocks,
Which like unruly Children, make their Sire
Stoop with oppression of their prodigal weight:
Give some supportance to the bending twigges.
Go thou, and like an Executioner
Cut off the heads of too fast growing sprayes,
That look too lofty in our Commonwealth:
All must be even, in our Government.
You thus employed, I will go root away
The noisome Weeds, that without profit suck
The Soyles fertility from wholesome flowers.

Why should we, in the compass of a Pale,
Keep Law and Form, and due Proportion,
Showing as in a Model our firm Estate?
When our Sea-walled Garden, the whole Land,
Is full of Weeds, her fairest Flowers choakt up,
Her Fruit Trees all vnpruin'd, her Hedges ruined,
Her Knots disordered, and her wholesome Herbs
Swarming with Caterpillars.

Hold thy peace.
He that has suffered this disordered Spring,
Has now himself met with the Fall of Leaf.
The Weeds that his broad-spreading Leaves did shelter,
That seemed, in eating him, to hold him up,
Are pulled up, Root and all, by Bullingbrooke:
I mean, the Earl of Wiltshire, Bushie, Green.

What are they dead?


They are,
And Bullingbrooke has seized the wastefull King.
Oh, what pity is it, that he had not so trimmed
And dressed his Land, as we this Garden, at time of year,
And wound the Bark, the skin of our Fruit Trees,
Least being ouer-proud with Sap and Blood,
With too much riches it confound it self?
Had he done so, to great and growing men,
They might have lived to bear, and he to taste
Their fruits of duty. Superfluous branches
We lop away, that bearing boughs may live:
Had he done so, himself had borne the Crown,
Which waste and idle hours, has quite thrown down.

What think you the King shall be deposed?


Deprest he is already, and deposed
It Is doubted he will be. Letters came last night
To a dear Friend of the Duke of Yorkes,
That tell black tidings.

Oh I am pressed to death through want of speaking:
Thou old Adams likeness, set to dress this Garden:
How dares thy harsh rude tongue sound this unpleasing news
What Eve? what Serpent has suggested thee,
To make a second fall of cursed man?
Why do thou say, King Richard is deposed,
Dare thou, thou little better thing then earth,
Divine his downfall? Say, where, when, and how
Came thou by this ill-tydings? Speak thou wretch.

Pardon me Madam. Little joy have I
To breath these news; yet what I say, is true;
King Richard, he is in the mighty hold
Of Bullingbrooke, their Fortunes both are weighed:
In your Lords Scale, is nothing but himself,
And some few Vanities, that make him light:
But in the Balance of great Bullingbrooke,
Besides himself, are all the English Peers,
And with that odds he weighes King Richard down.
Post you to London, and you will find it so,
I speak no more, then every one does know.

Nimble mischance, that art so light of foot,
Does not thy Embassage belong to me?
And am I last that knows it? Oh thou think
To serve me last, that I may longest keep
Thy sorrow in my breast. Come Ladies go,
To meet at London, Londons King in woe.
What was I borne to this: that my sad look,
Should grace the Triumph of great Bullingbrooke.
Gardener, for telling me this news of woe,
I would the Plants thou graft'st, may never grow.

Poor Queen, so that thy State might be no worse,
I would my skill were subject to thy curse:
Here did she drop a tear, here in this place
I Will set a Bank of Rue, sour Herb of Grace:
Rue, even for ruth, here shortly shall be seen,
In the remembrance of a Weeping Queen.

Call forth Bagot.
Now Bagot, freely speak thy mind,
What thou do know of Noble Glousters death:
Who wrought it with the King, and who performed
The bloody Office of his Timelesse end.

Then set before my face, the Lord Aumerle.


Cousin, stand forth, and look upon that man.


My Lord Aumerle, I know your daring tongue
Scorns to unsay, what it has once delivered.
In that dead time, when Glousters death was plotted,
I heard you say. Is not my arm of length,
That reaches from the restfull English Court
As far as Callis, to my Uncles head.
Amongst much other talk, that very time,
I heard you say, that you had rather refuse
The offer of an hundred thousand Crowns,
Then Bullingbrookes return to England; adding withal,
How blessed this Land would be, in this your Cosins death.

Princes, and Noble Lords:
What answer shall I make to this base man?
Shall I so much dishonor my fair Stars,
On equal terms to give him chasticement?
Either I must, or have mine honor soyl'd
With the Attaindor of his sland'rous Lips.
There is my Gage, the manual Seal of death
That marks thee out for Hell. Thou lie,
And will maintain what thou have said, is false,
In thy heart blood, though being all too base
To stain the temper of my Knightly sword.

Bagot forbear, thou shall not take it up.


Excepting one, I would he were the best
In all this presence, that has moved me so.

If that thy valor stand on sympathize:
There is my Gage, Aumerle, in Gage to thine:
By that fair Sun, that shows me where thou stand'st,
I heard thee say (and vauntingly thou spak'st it)
That thou were cause of Noble Glousters death.
If thou deniest it, twenty times thou lie,
And I will turn thy falsehood to thy heart,
Where it was forged with my Rapiers point.

Thou dare not (Coward) live to see the day.


Now by my Soul, I would it were this hour.


Fitzwater thou art damned to hell for this.


Aumerle, thou lye'st: his Honor is as true
In this Appeal, as thou art all unjust:
And that thou art so, there I throw my Gage
To prove it on thee, to the extremest point
Of mortal breathing. Seize it, if thou dare.

And if I do not, may my hands rot off,
And never brandish more reuengefull Steel,
Over the glittering Helmet of my Foe.

My Lord Fitz-water:
I do remember well, the very time
Aumerle, and you did talk.

My Lord,
It Is very true: You were in presence then,
And you can witness with me, this is true.

As false, by heaven,
As Heaven it self is true.

Surrey, thou Lie.


Dishonorable Boy;
That Lie, shall lie so heavy on my Sword,
That it shall render Vengeance, and Revenge,
Till thou the Lye-giuer, and that Lie, do lie
In earth as quiet, as thy Fathers Scull.
In proof whereof, there is mine Honors pawn,
Engage it to the Trial, if thou dare.

How fondly do thou spur a forward Horse?
If I dare eat, or drink, or breathe, or live,
I dare meet Surrey in a Wilderness,
And spit upon him, whilst I say he Lies,
And Lies, and Lies: there is my Bond of Faith,
To tie thee, to my strong Correction.
As I intend to thrive in this new World,
Aumerle is guilty of my true Appeal.
Besides, I heard the banished Norfolk say,
That thou Aumerle did send two of thy men,
To execute the Noble Duke at Callis.

Some honest Christian trust me with a Gage,
That Norfolk lies: here do I throw down this,
If he may be repealed, to try his Honor.

These differences shall all rest under Gage,
Till Norfolk be repealed: repealed he shall be;
And (though mine Enemy) restored again
To all his Lands and Seignories: when he is returned,
Against Aumerle we will enforce his Trial.

That honorable day shall never be seen.
Many a time has banished Norfolk fought
For Jesus Christ, in glorious Christian field
Streaming the Ensign of the Christian Cross,
Against black Pagans, Turks, and Saracens:
And toiled with works of War, retired himself
To Italy, and there at Venice gave
His Body to that pleasant Countries Earth,
And his pure Soul unto his Captain Christ,
Under whose Colors he had fought so long.

Why Bishop, is Norfolk dead?


As sure as I live, my Lord.


Sweet peace conduct his sweet Soul
To the Bosom of good old Abraham.
Lords Appealants, your differences shall all rest under gage,
Till we assign you to your days of Trial.

Great Duke of Lancaster, I come to thee
From plume-pluckt Richard, who with willing Soul
Adopts thee Heir, and his high Scepter yields
To the possession of thy Royal Hand.
Ascend his Throne, descending now from him,
And long live Henry, of that Name the Fourth.

In Gods Name, I Will ascend the Regal Throne.


Mary, Heaven forbid.
Worst in this Royal Presence may I speak,
Yet best beseeming me to speak the truth.
Would God, that any in this Noble Presence
Were enough Noble, to be upright Judge
Of Noble Richard: then true Nobleness would
Learn him forbearance from so foul a Wrong.
What Subject can give Sentence on his King?
And who sits here, that is not Richards Subject?
Thieves are not judged, but they are by to hear,
Although apparent guilt be seen in them:
And shall the figure of Gods Majesty,
His Captain, Steward, Deputy elect,
Anointed, Grown'd, planted many years,
Be judged by subject, and inferior breathe,
And he himself not present? Oh, forbid it, God,
That in a Christian Climate, Souls refin'de
Should show so heinous, black, obscene a deed.
I speak to Subjects, and a Subject speaks,
Stirred up by Heaven, thus boldly for his King.
My Lord of Hereford here, whom you call King,
Is a foul Traitor to proud Herefords King.
And if you Crown him, let me prophecy,
The blood of English shall manure the ground,
And future Ages groan for his foul Act.
Peace shall go sleep with Turks and Infidels,
And in this Seat of Peace, tumultuous Wars
Shall Kin with Kin, and Kind with Kind confound.
Disorder, Horror, Fear, and Mutiny
Shall here inhabit, and this Land be called
The field of Golgotha, and dead men's Sculls.
Oh, if you rear this House, against this House
It will the wofullest Division prove,
That ever fell upon this cursed Earth.
Prevent it, resist it, and let it not be so,
Least Child, Child's Children cry against you, Woe.

Well have you argued Sir: and for your pains,
Of Capital Treason we arrest you here.
My Lord of Westminster, be it your charge,
To keep him safely, till his day of Trial.
May it please you, Lords, to grant the Commons Suit?

Fetch hither Richard, that in common view
He may surrender: so we shall proceed
Without suspicion.

I will be his Conduct.


Lords, you that here are under our Arrest,
Procure your Sureties for your Days of Answer:
Little are we beholding to your Love,
And little looked for at your helping Hands.

Alack, why am I sent for to a King,
Before I have shook off the Regal thoughts
Wherewith I reigned? I hardly yet have learned
To insinuate, flatter, bow, and bend my Knee.
Give Sorrow leave a while, to tuture me
To this submission. Yet I well remember
The favors of these men: were they not mine?
Did they not sometime cry, All hayle to me?
So Judas did to Christ: but he in twelve,
Found truth in all, but one; I, in twelve thousand, none.
God save the King: will no man say, Amen?
Am I both Priest, and Clarke? well then, Amen.
God save the King, although I be not he:
And yet Amen, if Heaven do think him me.
To do what service, am I sent for hither?

To do that office of thine own good will,
Which tired Majesty did make thee offer:
The Resignation of thy State and Crown
To Henry Bullingbrooke.

Give me the Crown. Here Cousin, seize ye Crown:
Here Cousin, on this side my Hand, on that side thine.
Now is this Golden Crown like a deep Well,
That owes two Buckets, filling one another,
The emptier ever dancing in the air,
The other down, unseen, and full of Water:
That Bucket down, and full of Tears am I,
Drinking my Griefs, whilst you mount up on high.

I thought you had been willing to resign.


My Crown I am, but still my Griefs are mine:
You may my Glories and my State depose,
But not my Griefs; still am I King of those.

Part of your Cares you give me with your Crown.


Your Cares set up, do not pluck my Cares down.
My Care, is loss of Care, by old Care done,
Your Care, is gain of Care, by new Care won:
The Cares I give, I have, though given away,
They 'tend the Crown, yet still with me they stay:

Are you contended to resign the Crown?


I, no; no, I: for I must nothing be:
Therefore no, no, for I resign to thee.
Now, mark me how I will undo my self.
I give this heavy Weight from off my Head,
And this vnwieldie Scepter from my Hand,
The pride of Kingly sway from out my Heart.
With mine own Tears I wash away my Balm,
With mine own Hands I give away my Crown,
With mine own Tongue deny my Sacred State,
With mine own Breath release all dutious Oaths;
All Pomp and Majesty I do forswear:
My Manors, Rents, Revenues, I forgo;
My Acts, Decrees, and Statutes I deny:
God pardon all Oaths that are broke to me,
God keep all Vows unbroke are made to thee.
Make me, that nothing have, with nothing grieved,
And thou with all pleased, that have all atchieu'd.
Long may thou live in Richards Seat to sit,
And soon lie Richard in an Earthie Pit.
God save King Henry, vn-King'd Richard says,
And send him many years of Sunshine days.
What more remains?

No, more: but that you read
These Accusations, and these grievous Crimes,
Committed by your Person, and your followers,
Against the State, and Profit of this Land:
That by confessing them, the Souls of men
May deem, that you are worthily deposed.

Must I do so? and must I rauell out
My weau'd-vp follyes? Gentle Northumberland,
If thy Offenses were upon Record,
Would it not shame thee, in so fair a troop,
To read a Lecture of them? If thou would,
There should thou find one heinous Article,
Containing the deposing of a King,
And cracking the strong Warrant of an Oath,
Marked with a Blot, damned in the Book of Heaven.
Nay, all of you, that stand and look upon me,
Whilst that my wretchedness does bait my self,
Though some of you, with Pilate, wash your hands,
Showing an outward pity: yet you Pilates
Have here delivered me to my sour Cross,
And Water cannot wash away your sin.

My Lord dispatch, read over these Articles.


Mine Eyes are full of Tears, I cannot see:
And yet Salt Water blindes them not so much,
But they can see a sort of Traitors here.
Nay, if I turn mine Eyes upon my self,
I find my self a Traitor with the rest:
For I have given here my Souls consent,
T'vndeck the pompous Body of a King;
Made Glory base; a Sovereignty, a Slave;
Proud Majesty, a Subject; State, a Pesant.

My Lord.


No Lord of thine, thou haught-insulting man;
No, nor no man's Lord: I have no Name, no Title;
No, not that Name was given me at the Font.
But it is usurped: alack the heavy day,
That I have worn so many Winters out,
And know not now, what Name to call my self.
Oh, that I were a Mockery, King of Snow,
Standing before the Sun of Bullingbrooke,
To melt my self away in Water-drops.
Good King, great King, and yet not greatly good,
And if my word be Sterling yet in England,
Let it command a Mirror hither straight,
That it may show me what a Face I have,
Since it is Bankrupt of his Majesty.

Go some of you, and fetch a Looking-glass.


Read over this Paper, while yc Glass does come.


Fiend, thou torments me, ere I come to Hell.


Urge it no more, my Lord Northumberland.


The Commons will not then be satisfied.


They shall be satisfied: I Will read enough,
When I do see the very Book indeed,
Where all my sins are writ, and that is my self.
Give me that Glass, and therein will I read.
No deeper wrinckles yet? has Sorrow struck
So many Blows upon this Face of mine,
And made no deeper Wounds? Oh flattering Glass,
Like to my followers in prosperity,
Thou do beguile me. Was this Face, the Face
That every day, under his Household Roof,
Did keep ten thousand men? Was this the Face,
That like the Sun, did make beholders wink?
Is this the Face, which faced so many follyes,
That was at last out-fac'd by Bullingbrooke?
A brittle Glory shines in this Face,
As brittle as the Glory, is the Face,
For there it is, cracked in an hundred shiuers.
Mark silent King, the Moral of this sport,
How soon my Sorrow has destroyed my Face.

The shadow of your Sorrow has destroyed
The shadow of your Face.

Say that again.
The shadow of my Sorrow: ha, let us see,
It Is very true, my Grief lies all within,
And these external manner of Laments,
Are merely shadows, to the unseen Grief,
That swells with silence in the tortured Soul.
There lies the substance: and I thank thee King
For thy great bounty, that not only give
Me cause to wayle, but teach me the way
How to lament the cause. I Will beg one Boon,
And then be gone, and trouble you no more.
Shall I obtain it?

Name it, fair Cousin.


Fair Cousin? I am greater then a King:
For when I was a King, my flatterers
Were then but subjects; being now a subject,
I have a King here to my flatterer:
Being so great, I have no need to beg.

Yet ask.


And shall I have?


You shall.


Then give me leave to go.


Whither?


Whither you will, so I were from your sights.


Go some of you, convey him to the Tower.


Oh good: convey: Conueyers are you all,
That rise thus nimbly by a true Kings fall.

On Wednesday next, we solemnly set down
Our Coronation: Lords, prepare your selves.

A woeful Pageant have we here beheld.


The Woes to come, the Children yet unborn,
Shall feel this day as sharp to them as Thorn.

You holy Clergymen, is there no Plot
To rid the Realm of this pernicious Blot.

Before I freely speak my mind herein,
You shall not only take the Sacrament,
To bury mine intents, but also to effect
What ever I shall happen to devise.
I see your Brows are full of Discontent,
Your Heart of Sorrow, and your Eyes of Tears.
Come home with me to Supper, I Will lay a Plot
Shall show us all a merry day.

This way the King will come: this is the way
To Julius Caesar's ill-erected Tower:
To whose flint Bosom, my condemned Lord
Is doomed a Prisoner, by proud Bullingbrooke.
Here let us rest, if this rebellious Earth
Have any resting for her true Kings Queen.
But soft, but see, or rather do not see,
My fair Rose wither: yet look up; behold,
That you in pity may dissolve to dew,
And wash him fresh again with true-loue Tears.
Ah thou, the Model where old Troy did stand,
Thou Map of Honor, thou King Richards Yombe,
And not King Richard: thou most beauteous Inn,
Why should hard-fauor'd Grief be lodged in thee,
When Triumph is become an Alehouse Guest.

Join not with grief, fair Woman, do not so,
To make my end too sudden: learn good Soul,
To think our former State a happy Dream,
From which awaked, the truth of what we are,
Shows us but this. I am sworn Brother (Sweet)
To grim Necessity; and he and I
Will keep a League till Death. High thee to France,
And Cloister thee in some Religious House:
Our holy lives must win a new Worlds Crown,
Which our profane hours here have stricken down.

What, is my Richard both in shape and mind
Transformed, and weakened? Has Bullingbrooke
Deposed thine Intellect? has he been in thy Heart?
The Lion dying, thrusts forth his Paw,
And wounds the Earth, if nothing else, with rage
To be o're-powr'd: and will thou, Pupill-like,
Take thy Correction mildly, kiss the Rod,
And fawn on Rage with base Humility,
Which art a Lion, and a King of Beasts?

A King of Beasts indeed: if aught but Beasts,
I had been still a happy King of Men.
Good (sometime Queen) prepare thee hence for France:
Think I am dead, and that even here thou take,
As from my Deathbed, my last living leave.
In Winters tedious Nights sit by the fire
With good old folks, and let them tell thee Tales
Of woeful Ages, long ago betide:
And ere thou bid goodnight, to quit their grief,
Tell thou the lamentable fall of me,
And send the hearers weeping to their Beds:
For why? the senseless Brands will sympathize
The heavy accent of thy moving Tongue,
And in compassion, weep the fire out:
And some will mourn in ashes, some coale-black,
For the deposing of a rightful King.

My Lord, the mind of Bullingbrooke is changed.
You must to Pomfret, not unto the Tower.
And Madame, there is order taken for you:
With all swift speed, you must away to France.

Northumberland, thou Ladder wherewithal
The mounting Bullingbrooke ascends my Throne,
The time shall not be many hours of age,
More then it is, ere foul sin, gathering head,
Shall break into corruption: thou shall think,
Though he divide the Realm, and give thee half,
It is too little, helping him to all:
He shall think, that thou which know the way
To plant unrightful Kings, wilt know again,
Being never so little urged another way,
To pluck him headlong from the usurped Throne.
The Love of wicked friends conuerts to Fear;
That Fear, to Hate; and Hate turns one, or both,
To worthy Danger, and deserved Death.

My guilt be on my Head, and there an end:
Take leave, and part, for you must part forthwith.

Doubly diuorc'd? (bad men) ye violate
A twofold Marriage; 'twixt my Crown, and me,
And then betwixt me, and my married Wife.
Let me vn-kisse the Oath 'twixt thee, and me;
And yet not so, for with a Kiss 'twas made.
Part us, Northumberland: I, toward the North,
Where shiuering Cold and Sickness pines the Clyme:
My Queen to France: from whence, set forth in pomp,
She came adorned hither like sweet May;
Sent back like Hollowmas* or short'st of day.

And must we be divided? must we part?


I, hand from hand (my Love) and heart from heart.


Banish us both, and send the King with me.


That were some Love, but little Policy.


Then whither he goes, thither let me go.


So two together weeping, make one Woe.
Weep thou for me in France; I, for thee here:
Better far off, then near, be never the near.
Go, count thy Way with Sighs; I, mine with Groans.

So longest Way shall have the longest Moanes.


Twice for one step I Will groan, ye Way being short,
And piece the Way out with a heavy heart.
Come, come, in wooing Sorrow let us be brief,
Since wedding it, there is such length in Grief:
One Kiss shall stop our mouths, and dumbely part;
Thus give I mine, and thus take I thy heart.

Give me mine own again: 'twere no good part,
To take on me to keep, and kill thy heart.
So, now I have mine own again, be gone,
That I may strive to kill it with a groan.

We make Woe wanton with this fond delay:
Once more adieu; the rest, let Sorrow say.

My Lord, you told me you would tell the rest,
When weeping made you break the story off,
Of our two Cousins coming into London.

Where did I leave?


At that sad stop, my Lord,
Where rude mis-gouern'd hands, from Windows tops,
Threw dust and rubbish on King Richards head.

Then, as I said, the Duke, great Bullingbrooke,
Mounted upon a hot and fiery Steed,
Which his aspiring Rider seemed to know,
With slow, but stately pace, kept on his course:
While all tongues cride, God save thee Bullingbrooke.
You would have thought the very windows spoke,
So many greedy looks of young and old,
Through Casements darted their desiring eyes
Upon his visage: and that all the walls,
With painted Imagery had said at once,
Jesus preserve thee, welcome Bullingbrooke.
Whilst he, from one side to the other turning,
Bare-headed, lower then his proud Steeds neck,
Bespake them thus: I thank you Countrymen:
And thus still doing, thus he past along.

Alas poor Richard, where rides he the whilst?


As in a Theater, the eyes of men
After a well graced Actor leaves the Stage,
Are idly bent on him that enters next,
Thinking his prattle to be tedious:
Even so, or with much more contempt, men's eyes
Did scowle on Richard: no man cride, God save him:
No joyful tongue gave him his welcome home,
But dust was thrown upon his Sacred head,
Which with such gentle sorrow he shook off,
His face still combating with tears and smiles
(The badges of his grief and patience)
That had not God (for some strong purpose) steeled
The hearts of men, they must perforce have melted,
And Barbarism it self have pitied him.
But heaven has a hand in these events,
To whose high will we bound our calm contents.
To Bullingbrooke, are we sworn Subjects now,
Whose State, and Honor, I for aye allow.

Here comes my son Aumerle.


Aumerle that was,
But that is lost, for being Richards Friend.
And Madam, you must call him Rutland now:
I am in Parliament pledge for his truth,
And lasting fealty to the new-made King.

Welcome my son: who are the Violets now,
That strew the green lap of the new-come Spring?

Madam, I know not, nor I greatly care not,
God knows, I had as liefe be none, as one.

Well, bear you well in this new-spring of time
Least you be cropped before you come to prime.
What news from Oxford? Hold those Iusts and Triumphs?

For ought I know my Lord, they do.


You will be there I know.


If God prevent not, I purpose so.


What Seal is that that hangs without thy bosom?
Yea, look thou pale? Let me see the Writing.

My Lord, it is nothing.


No matter then who sees it,
I will be satisfied, let me see the Writing.

I do beseech your Grace to pardon me,
It is a matter of small consequence,
Which for some reasons I would not have seen.

Which for some reasons sir, I mean to see:
I fear, I fear.

What should you fear?
It Is nothing but some bond, that he is entered into
For gay apparel, against the Triumph.

Bound to himself? What does he with a Bond
That he is bound to? Wife, thou art a fool.
Boy, let me see the Writing.

I do beseech you pardon me, I may not show it.


I will be satisfied: let me see it I say.
Treason, foul Treason, Villain, Traitor, Slave.

What Is the matter, my Lord?


Hoa, who is within there? Saddle my horse.
Heaven for his mercy: what treachery is here?

Why, what is it my Lord?


Give me my boots, I say: Saddle my horse:
Now by my Honor, my life, my troth,
I will appeach the Villain.

What is the matter?


Peace foolish Woman.


I will not peace. What is the matter Son?


Good Mother be content, it is no more
Then my poor life must answer.

Thy life answer?


Bring me my Boots, I will unto the King.


Strike him Aumerle. Poor boy, you art amazed,
Hence Villain, never more come in my sight.

Give me my Boots, I say.


Why York, what will thou do?
Will thou not hide the Trespass of thine own?
Have we more Sons? Or are we like to have?
Is not my teeming date drunk up with time?
And will thou pluck my fair Son from mine Age,
And rob me of a happy Mothers name?
Is he not like thee? Is he not thine own?

Thou fond mad woman:
Will thou conceal this dark Conspiracy?
A dozen of them here have taken the Sacrament,
And interchangeably set down their hands
To kill the King at Oxford.

He shall be none:
We Will keep him here: then what is that to him?

Away fond woman: were he twenty times my Son, I would appeach him.


Had thou groaned for him as I have done,
Thou would be more pitiful:
But now I know thy mind; thou do suspect
That I have been disloyal to thy bed,
And that he is a Bastard, not thy Son:
Sweet York, sweet husband, be not of that mind:
He is as like thee, as a man may be,
Not like to me, nor any of my Kin,
And yet I love him.

Make way, unruly Woman.


After Aumerle. Mount thee upon his horse,
Spur post, and get before him to the King,
And beg thy pardon, ere he do accuse thee,
I Will not be long behind: though I be old,
I doubt not but to ride as fast as York:
And never will I rise up from the ground,
Till Bullingbrooke have pardoned thee: Away be gone.

Can no man tell of my unthrifty Son?
It Is full three months since I did see him last.
If any plague hang over us, it is he,
I would to heaven (my Lords) he might be found:
Enquire at London, amongst the Tauernes there:
For there (they say) he daily does frequent,
With unrestrained loose Companions,
Even such (they say) as stand in narrow Lanes,
And rob our Watch, and beat our passengers,
Which he, young wanton, and effeminate Boy
Takes on the point of Honor, to support
So dissolute a crew.

My Lord, some two days since I saw the Prince,
And told him of these Triumphs held at Oxford.

And what said the Gallant?


His answer was: he would unto the Stews,
And from the common'st creature pluck a Glove
And wear it as a favor, and with that
He would unhorse the lustiest Challenger.

As dissolute as desperate, yet through both,
I see some sparks of better hope: which elder days
May happily bring forth. But who comes here?

Where is the King?


What means our Cousin, that he stares
And looks so wildely?

God save your Grace. I do beseech your Majesty
To have some conference with your Grace alone.

Withdraw your selves, and leave us here alone:
What is the matter with our Cousin now?

For ever may my knees grow to the earth,
My tongue cleave to my roof within my mouth,
Unless a Pardon, ere I rise, or speak.

Intended, or committed was this fault?
If on the first, how heinous ere it be,
To win thy after love, I pardon thee.

Then give me leave, that I may turn the key,
That no man enter, till my tale me done.

Have thy desire.


My Liege beware, look to thy self,
Thou have a Traitor in thy presence there.

Villain, I Will make thee safe.


Stay thy reuengefull hand, thou have no cause to fear.


Open the door, secure foole-hardy King:
Shall I for love speak treason to thy face?
Open the door, or I will break it open.

What is the matter (Uncle) speak, recover breath,
Tell us how near is danger,
That we may arm us to encounter it.

Peruse this writing here, and thou shall know
The reason that my haste forbids me show.

Remember as thou read'st, thy promise past:
I do repent me, read not my name there,
My heart is not confederate with my hand.

It was (villain) ere thy hand did set it down.
I tore it from the Traitors bosom, King.
Fear, and not Love, begets his penitence;
Forget to pity him, least thy pity prove
A Serpent, that will sting thee to the heart.

Oh heinous, strong, and bold Conspiracy,
O loyal Father of a treacherous Son:
Thou sheere, immaculate, and silver fountain,
From whence this stream, through muddy passages
Has had his current, and defiled himself.
Thy ouerflow of good, conuerts to bad,
And thy abundant goodness shall excuse
This deadly blot, in thy digressing son.

So shall my Virtue be his Vices bawd,
And he shall spend mine Honor, with his Shame;
As thriftlesse Sons, their scraping Fathers Gold.
Mine honor lives, when his dishonor dies,
Or my shamed life, in his dishonor lies:
Thou kill'st me in his life, giving him breath,
The Traitor lives, the true man's put to death.

What hoa (my Liege) for heavens sake let me in.


What shrill-voic'd Suppliant, makes this eager cry?


A woman, and thine Aunt (great King) it is I.
Speak with me, pity me, open the door,
A Beggar begs, that never begged before.

Our Scene is altered from a serious thing,
And now changed to the Beggar, and the King.
My dangerous Cousin, let your Mother in,
I know she is come, to pray for your foul sin.

If thou do pardon, whosoever pray,
More sins for this forgiveness, prosper may.
This fester'd joint cut off, the rest rests sound,
This let alone, will all the rest confound.

O King, believe not this hard-hearted man,
Love, loving not it self, none other can.

Thou frantic woman, what do you make here,
Shall thy old dugges, once more a Traitor rear?

Sweet York be patient, hear me gentle Liege.


Rise up good Aunt.


Not yet, I thee beseech.
For ever will I kneel upon my knees,
And never see day, that the happy sees,
Till thou give joy: until thou bid me joy.
By pardoning Rutland, my transgressing Boy.

Unto my mothers prayres, I bend my knee.


Against them both, my true joints bended be.


Pleades he in earnest? Look upon his Face,
His eyes do drop no tears: his prayres are in jest:
His words come from his mouth, ours from our breast.
He prays but faintly, and would be denide,
We pray with heart, and soul, and all beside:
His weary joints would gladly rise, I know,
Our knees shall kneel, till to the ground they grow:
His prayers are full of false hypocrisy,
Ours of true zeal, and deep integrity:
Our prayers do out-pray his, then let them have
That mercy, which true prayers ought to have.

Good Aunt stand up.


Nay, do not say stand up.
But Pardon first, and afterward stand up.
And if I were thy Nurse, thy tongue to teach,
Pardon should be the first word of thy speech.
I never longed to hear a word till now:
Say Pardon (King,) let pity teach thee how.
The word is short: but not so short as sweet,
No word like Pardon, for Kings mouth's so meet.

Speak it in French (King) say Pardon'ne moy.


Do thou teach pardon, Pardon to destroy?
Ah my sour husband, my hard-hearted Lord,
That set's the word it self, against the word.
Speak Pardon, as it is current in our Land,
The chopping French we do not understand.
Thine eye begins to speak, set thy tongue there,
Or in thy pitteous heart, plant thou thine ear,
That hearing how our plaints and prayres do pearce,
Pity may move thee, Pardon to rehearse.

Good Aunt, stand up.


I do not sue to stand,
Pardon is all the suite I have in hand.

I pardon him, as heaven shall pardon me.


O happy vantage of a kneeling knee:
Yet am I sick (...) fear: Speak it again,
Twice saying Pardon, does not pardon twain,
But makes one pardon strong.

I pardon him with all my heart.


A God on earth thou art.


But for our trusty brother-in-Law, the Abbot,
With all the rest of that consorted crew,
Destruction straight shall dog them at the heels:
Good Uncle help to order several powers
To Oxford, or where ere these Traitors are:
They shall not live within this world I swear,
But I will have them, if I once know where.
Uncle farewell, and Cousin adieu:
Your mother well has praid, and prove you true.

Come my old son, I pray heaven make thee new.


Did thou not mark the King what words he spoke?
Have I no friend will rid me of this living fear:
Was it not so?

Those were his very words.


Have I no Friend? (quoth he:) he spoke it twice,
And urged it twice together, did he not?

He did.


And speaking it, he wistly looked on me,
As who should say, I would thou were the man
That would divorce this terror from my heart,
Meaning the King at Pomfret: Come, let us go;
I am the Kings Friend, and will rid his Foe.

I have bin studying, how to compare
This Prison where I live, unto the World:
And for because the world is populous,
And here is not a Creature, but my self,
I cannot do it: yet I Will hammer't out.
My Brain, I Will prove the Female to my Soul,
My Soul, the Father: and these two beget
A generation of still breeding Thoughts;
And these same Thoughts, people this Little World
In humors, like the people of this world,
For no thought is contented. The better sort,
As thoughts of things Divine, are intermixed
With scruples, and do set the Faith it self
Against the Faith: as thus: Come little ones: and then again,
It is as hard to come, as for a Camel
To thread the posterne of a Needles eye.
Thoughts tending to Ambition, they do plot
Unlikely wonders; how these vain weak nails
May tear a passage through the Flinty ribs
Of this hard world, my ragged prison walls:
And for they cannot, dye in their own pride.
Thoughts tending to Content, flatter themselves,
That they are not the first of Fortunes slaves,
Nor shall not be the last. Like silly Beggars,
Who sitting in the Stocks, refuge their shame
That many have, and others must sit there;
And in this Thought, they find a kind of ease,
Bearing their own misfortune on the back
Of such as have before endured the like.
Thus play I in one Prison, many people,
And none contented. Sometimes am I King;
Then Treason makes me wish my self a Beggar,
And so I am. Then crushing penury,
Persuades me, I was better when a King:
Then am I king'd again: and by and by,
Think that I am vn-king'd by Bullingbrooke,
And straight am nothing. But what ere I am,
Nor I, nor any man, that but man is,
With nothing shall be pleased, till he be eased
With being nothing, Music do I hear?
Ha, ha? keep time: How sour sweet Music is,
When Time is broke, and no Proportion kept?
So is it in the Music of men's lives:
And here have I the daintiness of ear,
To hear time broke in a disordered string:
But for the Concord of my State and Time,
Had not an ear to hear my true Time broke.
I wasted Time, and now does Time waste me:
For now has Time made me his numbering clock;
My Thoughts, are minutes; and with Sighs they jar,
Their watches on unto mine eyes, the outward Watch,
Whereto my finger, like a Dialls point,
Is pointing still, in cleansing them from tears.
Now sir, the sound that tells what hour it is,
Are clamorous groans, that strike upon my heart,
Which is the bell: so Sighs, and Tears, and Groans,
Show Minutes, Hours, and Times: but my Time
R^ns poasting on, in Bullingbrookes proud joy,
While I stand fooling here, his jack of the Clock.
This Music mads me, let it sound no more,
For though it have help madmen to their wits,
In me it seems, it will make wisemen mad:
Yet blessing on his heart that gives it me;
For it is a sign of love, and love to Richard,
Is a strange Brooch* in this all-hating world.

Hail Royal Prince.


Thanks Noble Peer,
The cheapest of us, is ten groates too dear.
What art thou? And how come thou hither?
Where no man ever comes, but that sad dog
That brings me food, to make misfortune live?

I was a poor Groom of thy Stable (King)
When thou were King: who traveling toward York,
With much adoo, at length have gotten leave
To look upon my (sometimes Royal) masters face.
O how it yern'd my heart, when I beheld
In London streets, that Coronation day,
When Bullingbrooke rode on Roane Barbary,
That horse, that thou so often have bestrid,
That horse, that I so carefully have dressed.

Rode he on Barbary? Tell me gentle Friend,
How went he under him?

So proudly, as if he had disdained the ground.


So proud, that Bullingbrooke was on his back;
That Jade has eat bread from my Royal hand.
This hand has made him proud with clapping him.
Would he not stumble? Would he not fall down
(Since Pride must have a fall) and break the neck
Of that proud man, that did usurp his back?
Forgiveness horse: Why do I rail on thee,
Since thou created to be awed by man
Was It borne to bear? I was not made a horse,
And yet I bear a burden like an Ass,
Spur-gall'd, and tyrd by la^nti^g Bullingbrooke.

Fellow, give place here is (...) ^nger ^y.


If ^hou love me, (...) thou with away.


What thy tongue da^s not, that my heart shall say.


My Lord, will please you to fall too?


Taste of it first, as thou were wont to do.


My Lord I dare not: Sir Pierce of Exton,
Who lately came from the King, commands the contrary.

The devil take Henry of Lancaster, and thee;
Patience is stale, and I am weary of it.

Help, help, help.


How now? what means Death in this rude assalt?
Villain, thine own hand yields thy deaths instrument,
Go thou and fill another room in hell.
That hand shall burn in neuer-quenching fire,
That staggers thus my person. Exton, thy fierce hand,
Has with the Kings blood, stained the Kings own land.
Mount, mount my soul, thy seat is up on high,
Whilst my gross flesh sinkes downward, here to dye.

As full of Valor, as of Royal blood,
Both have I spilt: Oh would the deed were good.
For now the devil, that told me I did well,
Says, that this deed is chronicled in hell.
This dead King to the living King I Will bear,
Take hence the rest, and give them burial here.

Kind Uncle York, the latest news we hear,
Is that the Rebels have consumed with fire
Our Town of Ciceter in Gloucestershire,
But whether they be taken or slain, we hear not.
Welcome my Lord: What is the news?

First to thy Sacred State, wish I all happiness:
The next news is, I have to London sent
The heads of Salsbury, Spencer, Blunt, and Kent:
The manner of their taking may appear
At large discoursed in this paper here.

We thank thee gentle Percy for thy pains,
And to thy worth will add right worthy gains.

My Lord, I have from Oxford sent to London,
The heads of Broccas, and Sir Bennet Seely,
Two of the dangerous consorted Traitors,
That sought at Oxford, thy dire overthrow.

Thy pains Fitzwaters shall not be forgot,
Right Noble is thy merit, well I wot.

The grand Conspirator, Abbot of Westminster,
With clog of Conscience, and sour Melancholy,
Has yielded up his body to the grave:
But here is Carlisle, living to abide
Thy Kingly doom, and sentence of his pride.

Carlisle, this is your doom:
Choose out some secret place, some reverend room
More then thou have, and with it joy thy life:
So as thou live in peace, dye free from strife:
For though mine enemy* thou have ever been,
High sparks of Honor in thee have I seen.

Great King, within this Coffin I present
Thy buried fear. Herein all breathless lies
The mightiest of thy greatest enemies
Richard of Bordeaux, by me hither brought.

Exton, I thank thee not, for thou have wrought
A deed of Slaughter, with thy fatal hand,
Upon my head, and all this famous Land.

From your own mouth my Lord, did I this deed.


They love not poison, that do poison need,
Nor do I thee: though I did wish him dead,
I hate the Murderer, love him murdered.
The guilt of conscience take thou for thy labor,
But neither my good word, nor Princely favor.
With Caine go wander through the shade of night,
And never show thy head by day, nor light.
Lords, I protest my soul is full of woe,
That blood should sprinkle me, to make me grow.
Come mourn with me, for that I do lament,
And put on sullen Black incontinent:
I Will make a voyage to the Holy Land,
To wash this blood off from my guilty hand.
March sadly after, grace my mourning here,
In weeping after this untimely Beer.


