NOw is the Winter of our Discontent,
Made glorious Summer by this Son of York:
And all the clouds that lowr'd upon our house
In the deep bosom of the Ocean buried.
Now are our brows bound with Victorious Wreathes,
Our bruised arms hung up for Monuments;
Our stern Alarums changed to merry Meetings;
Our dreadful Marches, to delightful Measures.
Grim-visag'd War, has smoothed his wrinkled Front:
And now, in stead of mounting Barbed Steeds,
To fright the Souls of fearful Adversaries,
He capers nimbly in a Ladies Chamber,
To the lascivious pleasing of a Lute.
But I, that am not shaped for sportiue tricks,
Nor made to court an amorous Looking-glass:
I, that am Rudely stamped, and want loves Majesty,
To strut before a wonton ambling Nymph:
I, that am curtailed of this fair Proportion,
Cheated of Feature by dissembling Nature,
Deformed, vn-finish'd, sent before my time
Into this breathing World, scarce half made up,
And that so lamely and unfashionable,
That dogs bark at me, as I halt by them.
Why I (in this weak piping time of Peace)
Have no delight to pass away the time,
Unless to see my Shadow in the Sun,
And descant on mine own Deformity.
And therefore, since I cannot prove a Lover,
To entertain these fair well spoken days,
I am determined to prove a Villain,
And hate the idle pleasures of these days.
Plots have I laid, Inductions dangerous,
By drunken Prophesies, Libels, and Dreams,
To set my Brother Clarence and the King
In deadly hate, the one against the other:
And if King Edward be as true and just,
As I am Subtle, False, and Treacherous,
This day should Clarence closely be mewed up:
About a Prophecy, which says that G,
Of Edwards heirs the murderer shall be.
Diue thoughts down to my soul, here Clarence comes.
Brother, good day: What means this armed guard
That waits upon your Grace?
His Majesty tendering my persons safety,
Has appointed this Conduct, to convey me to the Tower

Upon what cause?


Because my name is George.


Alack my Lord, that fault is none of yours:
He should for that commit your Godfathers.
O belike, his Majesty has some intent,
That you should be new Christened in the Tower.
But what is the matter Clarence, may I know?

Yea Richard, when I know: but I protest
As yet I do not: But as I can learn,
He hearkens after Prophesies and Dreams,
And from the Crosse-row pluckes the letter G:
And says, a Wizard told him, that by G,
His issue disinherited should be.
And for my name of George begins with G,
It follows in his thought, that I am he.
These (as I learn) and such like toys as these,
Has moved his Highness to commit me now.

Why this it is, when men are ruled by Women:
It Is not the King that sends you to the Tower,
My Lady Gray his Wife, Clarence it is she.
That tempts him to this harsh Extremity.
Was it not she, and that good man of Worship,
Anthony Woodeulle her Brother there,
That made him send Lord Hastings to the Tower?
From whence this present day he is delivered?
We are not safe Clarence, we are not safe.

By heaven, I think there is no man secure
But the Queens Kindred, and night-walking Heralds,
That trudge betwixt the King, and Mistress Shore.
Heard you not what an humble Suppliant
Lord Hastings was, for her delivery?

Humbly complaining to her Deity,
Got my Lord Chamberlain his liberty.
I Will tell you what, I think it is our way,
If we will keep in favor with the King,
To be her men, and wear her Livery.
The jealous ore-worne Widow, and her self,
Since that our Brother dubbed them Gentlewomen,
Are mighty Gossips in our Monarchy.

I beseech your Graces both to pardon me,
His Majesty has straightly given in charge,
That no man shall have private Conference
(Of what degree soever) with your Brother.

Even so, and please your Worship Brakenbury,
You may partake of any thing we say:
We speak no Treason man; We say the King
Is wise and virtuous, and his Noble Queen
Well struck in years, fair, and not iealious.
We say, that Shores Wife has a pretty Foot,
A cherry Lip, a bonny Eye, a passing pleasing tongue:
And that the Queens Kindred are made gentle Folks.
How say you sir? can you deny all this?

With this (my Lord) my self have naught to do.


Naught to do with Mistress Shore?
I tell thee Fellow, he that does naught with her
(Excepting one) were best to do it secretly alone.

What one, my Lord?


Her Husband Knave, would thou betray me?


I do beseech your Grace
To pardon me, and withal forbear
Your Conference with the Noble Duke.

We know thy charge Brakenbury, and will obey.


We are the Queens abiects, and must obey.
Brother farewell, I will unto the King,
And whatsoever you will employ me in,
Were it to call King Edwards Widow, Sister,
I will perform it to infranchise you*
Mean time, this deep disgrace in Brotherhood.
Touches me deeper then you can imagine.

I know it pleases neither of us well.


Well, your imprisonment shall not be long,
I will deliver you, or else lie for you:
Mean time, have patience.

I must perforce: Farewell.


Go tread the path that thou shall never return:
Simple plain Clarence, I do love thee so,
That I will shortly send thy Soul to Heaven,
If Heaven will take the present at our hands.
But who comes here? the new delivered Hastings?

Good time of day unto my gracious Lord.


As much unto my good Lord Chamberlain:
Well are you welcome to this open Air,
How has your Lordship brook'd imprisonment?

With patience (Noble Lord) as prisoners must:
But I shall live (my Lord) to give them thanks
That were the cause of my imprisonment.

No doubt, no doubt, and so shall Clarence too,
For they that were your Enemies, are his,
And have prevailed as much on him, as you,

More pity, that the Eagles should be mewed,
Whiles Kites and Buzards play at liberty.

What news abroad?


No news so bad abroad, as this at home:
The King is sickly, weak, and melancholy,
And his Physicians fear him mightily.

Now by S. John, that News is bad indeed.
O he has kept an evil Diet long,
And overmuch consumed his Royal Person:
It Is very grievous to be thought upon
Where is he, in his bed?

He is.


Go you before, and I will follow you.

He cannot live I hope, and must not dye,
Till George be packed with post-horse up to Heaven.
I Will in to urge his hatred more to Clarence,
With Lies well steeled with weighty Arguments,
And if I fail not in my deep intent,
Clarence has not another day to live:
Which done, God take King Edward to his mercy,
And leave the world for me to b^ssle in.
For then, I Will marry Warwickes youngest daughter.
What though I killed her Husband, and her Father,
The readiest way to make the Wench amends,
Is to become her Husband, and her Father:
The which will I, not all so much for love,
As for another secret close intent,
By marrying her, which I must reach unto*
But yet I run before my horse to Market:
Clarence still breathes, Edward still lives and reigns,
When they are gone, then must I count my gains.

Set down, set down your honorable load,
If Honor may be shrouded in a Hearse;
Whilst I awhile obsequiously lament
The untimely fall of Virtuous Lancaster.
Poor key-cold Figure of a holy King,
Pale Ashes of the House of Lancaster;
Thou bloodlesse Remnant of that Royal Blood,
Be it lawful that I invoke thy Ghost,
To hear the Lamentations of poor Anne,
Wife to thy Edward, to thy slaughtred Son,
Stabbed by the selfsame hand that made these wounds.
Lo, in these windows that let forth thy life,
I power the helpless Balm of my poor eyes.
O cursed be the hand that made these holes:
Cursed the Heart, that had the heart to do it:
Cursed the Blood, that let this blood from hence:
More direful hap betide that hated Wretch
That makes us wretched by the death of thee,
Then I can wish to Wolves, to Spiders, Toades,
Or any creeping venomed thing that lives.
If ever he have Child, Abortiue be it,
Prodigeous, and untimely brought to light,
Whose ugly and unnatural Aspect
May fright the hopeful Mother at the view,
And that be Heir to his unhappiness.
If ever he have Wife, let her be made
More miserable by the death of him,
Then I am made by my young Lord, and thee.
Come now toward Chertsey with your holy Lode,
Taken from Paul's, to be interred there.
And still as you are weary of this weight,
Rest you, whiles I lament King Henry's Coarse.

Stay you that bear the Coarse, and set it down.


What black Magitian coniures up this Fiend,
To stop devoted charitable deeds?

Villains set down the Coarse, or by S. Paul,
I Will make a Coarse of him that disobeyes.

My Lord stand back, and let the Coffin pass.


Vnmanner'd Dog,
Stand'st thou when I command:
Advance thy Halbert higher then my breast,
Or by S. Paul I Will strike thee to my Foot,
And spurn upon thee Beggar for thy boldness.

What do you tremble? are you all afraid?
Alas, I blame you not, for you are Mortal,
And Mortal eyes cannot endure the Devil.
Auant thou dreadful minister of Hell;
Thou had but power over his Mortal body,
His Soul thou can not have: Therefore be gone.

Sweet Saint, for Charity, be not so cursed.


Foul Devil,
For Gods sake hence, and trouble us not,
For thou have made the happy earth thy Hell:
Filled it with cursing cries, and deep exclaimes:
If thou delight to view thy heinous deeds,
Behold this pattern of thy Butcheries.
Oh Gentlemen, see, see dead Henry's wounds,
Open their congealed mouths, and bleed afresh.
Blush, blush, thou lump of foul Deformity:
For it is thy presence that exhales this blood
From cold and empty Veins where no blood dwells.
Thy Deeds inhumane and unnatural,
Prouokes this Deluge most unnatural.
O God! which this Blood made, revenge his death:
O Earth! which this Blood drink'st, revenge his death.
Either Heaven with Lightning strike the murderer dead:
Or Earth gape open wide, and eat him quick,
As thou do swallow up this good Kings blood,
Which his Hell-gouern'd arm has butchered.

Lady, you know no Rules of Charity,
Which renders good for bad, Blessings for Curses.

Villain, thou know nor law of God nor Man,
No Beast so fierce, but knows some touch of pity.

But I know none, and therefore am no Beast.


O wonderful, when devils tell the truth!


More wonderful, when Angels are so angry:
Vouchsafe (divine perfection of a Woman)
Of these supposed Crimes, to give me leave
By circumstance, but to acquit my self.

Vouchsafe (defus'd infection of man)
Of these known evils, but to give me leave
By circumstance, to curse thy cursed Self.

Fairer then tongue can name thee, let me have
Some patient leisure to excuse my self.

Fouler then heart can think thee,
Thou can make no excuse current,
But to hang thy self.

By such despair, I should accuse my self.


And by dispairing shall thou stand excused,
For doing worthy Vengeance on thy self,
That did unworthy slaughter upon others.

Say that I slew them not.


Then say they were not slain:
But dead they are, and devilish slave by thee.

I did not kill your Husband.


Why then he is alive.


Nay, he is dead, and slain by Edwards hands.


In thy foul throat thou Lie,
Queen Margaret saw
Thy murderous Faulchion smoking in his blood:
The which, thou once didd'st bend against her breast,
But that thy Brothers beat aside the point.

I was provoked by her sland'rous tongue,
That laid their guilt, upon my guiltless Shoulders.

Thou was it provoked by thy bloody mind,
That never dream'st on ought but Butcheries:
Did thou not kill this King?

I grant ye.


Do grant me Hedge-hogge,
Then God grant me too
Thou may be damned for that wicked deed,
O he was gentle, mild, and virtuous.

The better for the King of heaven that has him.


He is in heaven, where thou shall never come.


Let him thank me, that help to send him thither:
For he was fitter for that place then earth.

And thou unfit for any place, but hell.


Yes one place else, if you will hear me name it.


Some dungeon.


Your Bedchamber.


Ill rest betide the chamber where thou lie.


So will it Madam, till I lie with you.


I hope so.


I know so. But gentle Lady Anne,
To leave this keen encounter of our wits,
And fall something into a slower method.
Is not the causer of the timelesse deaths
Of these Plantagenets, Henry and Edward,
As blamefull as the Executioner.

Thou was it the cause, and most accursed effect.


Your beauty was the cause of that effect:
Your beauty, that did haunt me in my sleep,
To undertake the death of all the world,
So I might live one hour in your sweet bosom.

If I thought that, I tell thee Homicide,
These Nails should rent that beauty from my Cheeks.

These eyes could not endure yt beauties wrack,
You should not blemish it, if I stood by;
As all the world is cheared by the Sun,
So I by that: It is my day, my life.

Black night ore-shade thy day, and death thy life.


Curse not thy self fair Creature,
Thou art both.

I would I were, to be revenged on thee.


It is a quarrel most unnatural,
To be revenged on him that loves thee.

It is a quarrel just and reasonable,
To be revenged on him that killed my Husband.

He that bereft the Lady of thy Husband,
Did it to help thee to a better Husband.

His better does not breath upon the earth.


He lives, that loves thee better then he could.


Name him.


Plantagenet.


Why that was he.


The selfsame name, but one of better Nature.


Where is he?


Here:
Why do thou spit at me.

Would it were mortal poison, for thy sake.


Never came poison from so sweet a place.


Never hung poison on a fowler Toade.
Out of my sight, thou do infect mine eyes.

Thine eyes (sweet Lady) have infected mine.


Would they were Basiliskes, to strike thee dead.


I would they were, that I might dye at once:
For now they kill me with a living death.
Those eyes of thine, from mine have drawn salt Tears;
Shamed their Aspects with store of childish drops:
These eyes, which never shed remorsefull tear,
No, when my Father York, and Edward wept,
To hear the pittious moan that Rutland made
When black-fac'd Clifford shook his sword at him.
Nor when thy warlike Father like a Child,
Told the sad story of my Fathers death,
And twenty times, made pause to sob and weep:
That all the standers by had wet their cheeks
Like Trees bedash'd with rain. In that sad time,
My manly eyes did scorn an humble tear:
And what these sorrows could not thence exhale,
Thy Beauty has, and made them blind with weeping.
I never sued to Friend, nor Enemy:
My Tongue could never learn sweet smoothing word.
But now thy Beauty is proposed my Fee,
My proud heart sues, and prompts my tongue to speak.
Teach not thy lip such Scorn; for it was made
For kissing Lady, not for such contempt.
If thy reuengefull heart cannot forgive,
Lo here I lend thee this sharpe-pointed Sword,
Which if thou please to hide in this true breast,
And let the Soul forth that adoreth thee,
I lay it naked to the deadly stroke,
And humbly beg the death upon my knee,
Nay do not pause: For I did kill King Henry,
But 'twas thy Beauty that provoked me.
Nay now dispatch: 'Twas I that stabbed young Edward,
But 'twas thy Heavenly face that set me on.
Take up the Sword again, or take up me.

Arise Dissembler, though I wish thy death,
I will not be thy Executioner.

Then bid me kill my self, and I will do it.


I have already.


That was in thy rage:
Speak it again, and even with the word,
This hand, which for thy love, did kill thy Love,
Shall for thy love, kill a far truer Love,
To both their deaths shall thou be accessory.

I would I knew thy heart.


It Is figured in my tongue.


I fear me, both are false.


Then never Man was true.


Well, well, put up your Sword.


Say then my Peace is made.


That shall thou know hereafter.


But shall I live in hope.


All men I hope live so.
Vouchsafe to wear this Ring.

Look how my Ring incompasseth thy Finger,
Even so thy Breast incloseth my poor heart:
Wear both of them, for both of them are thine.
And if thy poor devoted Servant may
But beg one favor at thy gracious hand,
Thou do confirm his happiness for ever.

What is it?


That it may please you leave these sad designs,
To him that has most cause to be a Mourner,
And presently repair to Crosbie House:
Where (after I have solemnly interred
At Chertsey Monast'ry this Noble King,
And wet his Grave with my Repentant Tears)
I will with all expedient duty see you,
For diverse unknown Reasons, I beseech you,
Grant me this Boon.

With all my heart, and much it joys me too,
To see you are become so penitent.
Tressel and Barkley, go along with me.

Bid me farewell.


It Is more then you deserve:
But since you teach me how to flatter you,
Imagine I have said farewell already.

Toward Chertsey, Noble Lord?


No: to White Friars, there attend my coming
Was ever woman in this humor wooed?
Was ever woman in this humor won?
I Will have her, but I will not keep her long.
What? I that killed her Husband, and his Father,
To take her in her hearts extremest hate,
With curses in her mouth, Tears in her eyes,
The bleeding witness of my hatred by,
Having God, her Conscience, and these bars against me,
And I, no Friends to back my suite withal,
But the plain Devil, and dissembling looks?
And yet to win her? All the world to nothing.
Hah!
Has she forgot already that brave Prince,
Edward, her Lord, whom I (some three months since)
Stabbed in my angry mood, at Tewkesbury?
A sweeter, and a louelier Gentleman,
Framed in the prodigallity of Nature:
Young, Valiant, Wise, and (no doubt) right Royal,
The spacious World cannot again afford:
And will she yet abase her eyes on me,
That cropped the Golden prime of this sweet Prince,
And made her Widow to a woeful Bed?
On me, whose All not equals Edwards Moytie?
On me, that halts, and am misshapen thus?
My Dukedom, to a Beggarly denier!
I do mistake my person all this while:
Upon my life she finds (although I cannot)
My self to be a maru'llous proper man.
I Will be at Charges for a Looking-glass,
And entertain a score or two of Tailors,
To study fashions to adorn my body:
Since I am crept in favor with my self,
I will maintain it with some little cost.
But first I Will turn you Fellow in his Grave,
And then return lamenting to my Love.
Shine out fair Sun, till I have bought a glass,
That I may see my Shadow as I pass.

Have patience Madam, there is no doubt his Majesty
Will soon recover his accustomed health.

In that you brook it ill, it makes him worse,
Therefore for Gods sake entertain good comfort,
And cheer his Grace with quick and merry eyes

If he were dead, what would betide on me?


No other harm, but loss of such a Lord.


The loss of such a Lord, includes all harms.


The Heavens have blessed you with a goodly Son,
To be your Comforter, when he is gone.

Ah! he is young; and his minority
Is put unto the trust of Richard Glouster,
A man that loves not me, nor none of you.

Is it concluded he shall be Protector?


It is determined, not concluded yet:
But so it must be, if the King miscarry.

Here comes the Lord of Buckingham and Derby.


Good time of day unto your Royal Grace.


God make your Majesty joyful, as you have bin


The Countess Richmond, good my L. of Derby.
To your good prayer, will scarsely say, Amen.
Yet Derby, notwithstanding she is your wife,
And loves not me, be you good Lord assured,
I hate not you for her proud arrogance.

I do beseech you, either not believe
The envious slanders of her false Accusers:
Or if she be accused on true report,
Bear with her weakness, which I think proceeds
From wayward sickness, and no grounded malice.

Saw you the King to day my Lord of Derby.


But now the Duke of Buckingham and I,
Are come from visiting his Majesty.

What likelihood of his amendment Lords.


Madam good hope, his Grace speaks cheerfully.


God grant him health, did you confer with him?


I Madam, he desires to make atonement*
Between the Duke of Glouster, and your Brothers,
And between them, and my Lord Chamberlain,
And sent to warn them to his Royal presence.

Would all were well, but that will never be,
I fear our happiness is at the height.

They do me wrong, and I will not endure it,
Who is it that complains unto the King,
Thar I (forsooth) am stern, and love them not?
By holy Paul, they love his Grace but lightly,
That fill his ears with such dissentious Rumors.
Because I cannot flatter, and look fair,
Smile in men's faces, smooth, deceive, and cogge,
Ducke with French nods, and Apish courtesy,
I must be held a rancorous Enemy.
Cannot a plain man live, and think no harm,
But thus his simple truth must be abused,
With silken, slye, insinuating Iackes?

To who in all this presence speaks your Grace?


To thee, that have nor Honesty, nor Grace:
When have I injured thee? When done thee wrong?
Or thee? or thee? or any of your Faction?
A plague upon you all. His Royal Grace
(Whom God preserve better then you would wish)
Cannot be quiet scarce a breathing while,
But you must trouble him with lewd complaints.

Brother of Glouster, you mistake the matter:
The King on his own Royal disposition,
(And not prouok'd by any Suitor else)
Aiming (belike) at your interior hatred,
That in your outward action shows it self
Against my Children, Brothers, and my Self,
Makes him to send, that he may learn the ground.

I cannot tell, the world is grown so bad,
That Wrens make prey, where Eagles dare not perch.
Since every Jack became a Gentleman,
There Is many a gentle person made a Jack.

Come, come, we know your meaning Brother Gloucester
You envy my advancement, and my friends:
God grant we never may have need of you.

Mean time, God grants that I have need of you.
Our Brother is imprisoned by your means,
My self disgraced, and the Nobility
Held in contempt, while great Promotions
Are daily given to ennoble those
That scarce some two days since were worth a Noble.

By him that raised me to this careful height,
From that contented hap which I inioy'd,
I never did incense his Majesty
Against the Duke of Clarence, but have bin
An earnest advocate to plead for him.
My Lord you do me shameful injury,
Falsely to draw me in these vile suspects.

You may deny that you were not the mean
Of my Lord Hastings late imprisonment.

She may my Lord, for --


She may Lord Rivers, why who knows not so?
She may do more sir then denying that:
She may help you to many fair preferments,
And then deny her ayding hand therein,
And lay those Honors on your high desert.
What may she not, she may, I marry may she.

What marry may she?


What marry may she? Marry with a King,
A Batcheller, and a handsome stripling too,
I wis your Grandam had a worser match.

My Lord of Glouster, I have too long borne
Your blunt vpbraidings, and your bitter scoffs:
By heaven, I will acquaint his Majesty
Of those gross taunts that often I have endured.
I had rather be a Country servant maid
Then a great Queen, with this condition,
To be so baited, scorned, and stormed at,
Small joy have I in being Englands Queen.

And lesned be that small, God I beseech him,
Thy honor, state, and seat, is due to me.

What? threat you me with telling of the King?
I will auouch't in presence of the King:
I dare adventure to be sent to the Tower.
It Is time to speak,
My pains are quite forgot.

Out Devil,
I do remember them too well:
Thou killd'st my Husband Henry in the Tower,
And Edward my poor Son, at Tewkesburie.

Ere you were Queen,
I, or your Husband King:
I was a packe-horse in his great affairs:
A weeder out of his proud Adversaries,
A liberal rewarder of his Friends,
To royalize his blood, I spent mine own.

I and much better blood
Then his, or thine.

In all which time, you and your Husband Gray
Were factious, for the House of Lancaster;
And Rivers, so were you: Was not your Husband,
In Margarets Battle, at Saint Albons, slain?
Let me put in your minds, if you forget
What you have been ere this, and what you are:
Withal, what I have been, and what I am.

A murderous Villain, and so still thou art.


Poor Clarence did forsake his Father Warwick,
I, and forswore himself (which Jesus pardon.)

Which God revenge.


To fight on Edwards party, for the Crown,
And for his meede, poor Lord, he is mewed up:
I would to God my heart were Flint, like Edwards,
Or Edwards soft and pitiful, like mine;
I am too childish foolish for this World.

High thee to Hell for shame, and leave this World
Thou Cacodemon, there thy Kingdom is.

My Lord of Gloucester: in those busy days,
Which here you urge, to prove us Enemies,
We followed then our Lord, our Sovereign King,
So should we you, if you should be our King.

If I should be? I had rather be a Peddler:
Far be it from my heart, the thought thereof.

As little joy (my Lord) as you suppose
You should enjoy, were you this Countries King,
As little joy you may suppose in me,
That I enjoy, being the Queen thereof.

A little joy enioyes the Queen thereof,
For I am she, and altogether ioylesse:
I can no longer hold me patient.
Hear me, you wrangling Pirates, that fall out,
In sharing that which you have pill'd from me:
Which off you trembles not, that looks on me?
If not, that I am Queen, you bow like Subjects;
Yet that by you deposed, you quake like Rebels.
Ah gentle Villain, do not turn away.

Foul wrinckled Witch, what make thou in my sight?

But repetition of what thou have marred,
That will I make, before I let thee go.

Were thou not banished, on pain of death?


I was: but I do find more pain in banishment,
Then death can yield me here, by my abode.
A Husband and a Son thou ow'st to me,
And thou a Kingdom; all of you, allegiance:
This Sorrow that I have, by right is yours,
And all the Pleasures you usurp, are mine.

The Curse my Noble Father laid on thee,
When thou did Crown his Warlike Brows with Paper,
And with thy scorns drew'st Rivers from his eyes,
And then to dry them, gan'st the Duke a Clowt,
Steeped in the faultlesse blood of pretty Rutland:
His Curses then, from bitterness of Soul,
Denounced against thee, are all fallen upon thee:
And God, not we, has plagued thy bloody deed.

So just is God, to right the innocent.


O, 'twas the foulest deed to slay that Babe,
And the most merciless, that ere was heard of.

Tyrants themselves wept when it was reported.


No man but prophesied revenge for it.


Northumberland, then present, wept to see it.


What? were you snarling all before I came,
Ready to catch each other by the throat,
And turn you all your hatred now on me?
Did Yorkes dread Curse prevail so much with Heaven,
That Henry's death, my lovely Edwards death,
Their Kingdoms loss, my woeful Banishment,
Should all but answer for that peevish Brat?
Can Curses pierce the Clouds, and enter Heaven?
Why then give way dull Clouds to my quick Curses.
Though not by War, by Surfeit dye your King,
As ours by Murder, to make him a King.
Edward thy Son, that now is Prince of Wales,
For Edward our Son, that was Prince of Wales,
Dye in his youth, by like untimely violence.
Thy self a Queen, for me that was a Queen,
Out-liue thy glory, like my wretched self:
Long may thou live, to wayle thy Childrens death,
And see another, as I see thee now,
Decked in thy Rights, as thou art stall'd in mine.
Long dye thy happy days, before thy death,
And after many lengthened hours of grief,
Dye neither Mother, Wife, nor Englands Queen.
Rivers and Dorset, you were standers by,
And so wast thou, Lord Hastings, when my Son
Was stabbed with bloody Daggers: God, I pray him,
That none of you may live his natural age,
But by some unlooked accident cut off.

Have done thy Charm, you hateful withered Hagge.


And leave out thee? stay Dog, for you shall hear me.
If Heaven have any grievous plague in store,
Exceeding those that I can wish upon thee,
O let them keep it, till thy sins be ripe,
And then hurl down their indignation
On thee, the troubler of the poor Worlds peace.
The Worm of Conscience still begnaw thy Soul,
Thy Friends suspect for Traitors while thou live,
And take deep Traitors for thy dearest Friends:
No sleep close up that deadly Eye of thine,
Unless it be while some tormenting Dream
Affrights thee with a Hell of ougly Devils.
Thou eluish marked, abortiue rooting Hog,
Thou that wast sealed in thy Nativity
The slave of Nature, and the Son of Hell:
Thou slander of thy heavy Mothers Womb,
Thou loathed Issue of thy Fathers Loins,
Thou Ragge of Honor, thou detested --

Margaret.


Richard.


Ha.


I call thee not.


I cry thee mercy then: for I did think,
That thou had called me all these bitter names.

Why so I did, but looked for no reply.
Oh let me make the Period to my Curse.

It Is done by me, and ends in Margaret.


Thus have you breathed your Curse against your self.


Poor painted Queen, vain flourish of my fortune,
Why strew'st thou Sugar on that Bottel'd Spider,
Whose deadly Web ensnareth thee about?
Fool, fool, thou whet'st a Knife to kill thy self:
The day will come, that thou shall wish for me,
To help thee curse this poisonous Bunch-backt Toade.

False boding Woman, end thy frantic Curse,
Least to thy harm, thou move our patience.

Foul shame upon you, you have all moved mine.


Were you well served, you would be taught your duty.


To serve me well, you all should do me duty,
Teach me to be your Queen, and you my Subjects:
O serve me well, and teach your selves that duty.

Dispute not with her, she is lunaticke.


Peace Master Marquess, you are malapert,
Your fire-new stamp of Honor is scarce current.
O that your young Nobility could judge
What 'twere to lose it, and be miserable.
They that stand high, have many blasts to shake them,
And if they fall, they dash themselves to pieces.

Good counsel marry, learn it, learn it Marquess.


It touches you my Lord, as much as me.


I, and much more: but I, was borne so high:
Our ayerie builds in the Cedars top,
And dallies with the wind, and scorns the Sun.

And turns the Sun to shade: alas, alas,
Witness my Son, now in the shade of death,
Whose bright out-shining beams, thy cloudy wrath
Has in eternal darkness folded up.
Your ayery builds in our ayeries Nest:
O God that see it, do not suffer it,
As it is won with blood, lost be it so.

Peace, peace for shame: If not, for Charity.


Urge neither charity, nor shame to me:
Uncharitably with me have you dealt,
And shamefully my hopes (by you) are butchered.
My Charity is outrage, Life my shame,
And in that shame, still live my sorrows rage.

Have done, have done.


O Princely Buckingham, I Will kiss thy hand,
In sign of League and amity with thee:
Now fair befall thee, and thy Noble house:
Thy Garments are not spotted with our blood:
Nor thou within the compass of my curse.

Nor no one here: for Curses never pass
The lips of those that breath them in the air.

I will not think but they ascend the sky,
And there awake Gods gentle sleeping peace.
O Buckingham, take heed of yonder dog:
Look when he fawnes, he bites; and when he bites,
His venom tooth will rankle to the death.
Have not to do with him, beware of him,
Sin, death, and hell have set their marks on him,
And all their Ministers attend on him.

What does she say, my Lord of Buckingham.


Nothing that I respect my gracious Lord.


What do thou scorn me
For my gentle counsel?
And sooth the devil that I warn thee from.
O but remember this another day:
When he shall split thy very heart with sorrow:
And say (poor Margaret) was a Prophetess:
Live each of you the subjects to his hate,
And he to yours, and all of you to Gods.

My hair does stand an end to hear her curses.


And so does mine, I muse why she is at liberty.


I cannot blame her, by Gods holy mother,
She has had too much wrong, and I repent
My part thereof, that I have done to her.

I never did her any to my knowledge.


Yet you have all the vantage of her wrong:
I was too hot, to do somebody good,
That is too cold in thinking of it now:
Marry as for Clarence, he is well repayed:
He is frank'd up to fatting for his pains,
God pardon them, that are the cause thereof.

A virtuous, and a Christian-like conclusion
To pray for them that have done scath to us.

So do I ever, being well advised.
For had I cursed now, I had cursed my self.

Madam, his Majesty does call for you,
And for your Grace, and yours my gracious Lord.

Catesby I come, Lords will you go with me.


We wait upon your Grace.


I do the wrong, and first begin to brawle.
The secret Mischeefes that I set abroach,
I lay unto the grievous charge of others.
Clarence, who I indeed have cast in darkness,
I do beweepe to many simple Gulles,
Namely to Derby, Hastings, Buckingham,
And tell them it is the Queen, and her Allies,
That stir the King against the Duke my Brother.
Now they believe it, and withal whet me
To be revenged on Rivers, Dorset, Gray.
But then I sigh, and with a piece of Scripture,
Tell them that God bids us do good for evil:
And thus I cloth my naked Villainy
With odd old ends, stolen forth of holy Writ,
And seem a Saint, when most I play the devil.
But soft, here come my Executioners,
How now my hardy stout resolved Mates,
Are you now going to dispatch this thing?

We are my Lord, and come to have the Warrant,
That we may be admitted where he is.

Well thought upon, I have it hear about me:
When you have done, repair to Crosby place;
But sirs be sudden in the execution,
Withal obdurate, do not hear him plead;
For Clarence is well spoken, and perhaps
May move your hearts to pity, if you mark him.

Tut, tut, my Lord, we will not stand to prate,
Talkers are no good dooers, be assured:
We go to use our hands, and not our tongues.

Your eyes drop Millstones, when Fools eyes fall Tears:
I like you Lads, about your business straight.
Go, go, dispatch.

We will my Noble Lord.


Why looks your Grace so heavily to day.


O, I have past a miserable night,
So full of fearful Dreams, of ugly sights,
That as I am a Christian faithful man,
I would not spend another such a night
Though 'twere to buy a world of happy days:
So full of dismal terror was the time.

What was your dream my Lord, I pray you tell me


Me thoughts that I had broken from the Tower,
And was embarked to cross to Burgundy,
And in my company my Brother Glouster,
Who from my Cabin tempted me to walk,
Upon the Hatches: There we looked toward England,
And cited up a thousand heavy times,
During the wars of York and Lancaster
That had befalne us. As we paced along
Upon the giddy footing of the Hatches,
Me thought that Glouster stumbled, and in falling
Struck me (that thought to stay him) ouer-boord,
Into the tumbling billows of the maine.
O Lord, me thought what pain it was to drown,
What dreadful noise of water in mine ears,
What sights of ugly death within mine eyes.
Me thoughts, I saw a thousand fearful wrackes:
A thousand men that Fishes gnawed upon:
Wedges of Gold, great Anchors, heaps of Pearl,
Inestimable Stones, vnvalewed Jewels,
All scattred in the bottom of the Sea,
Some lay in dead-mens Sculles, and in the holes
Where eyes did once inhabit, there were crept
(As 'twere in scorn of eyes) reflecting Gemmes,
That wooed the slimy bottom of the deep,
And mocked the dead bones that lay scattred by.

Had you such leisure in the time of death
To gaze upon these secrets of the deep?

Me thought I had, and often did I strive
To yield the Ghost: but still the envious Flood
Stopped in my soul, and would not let it forth
To find the empty, vast, and wandering air:
But smothered it within my panting bulk,
Who almost burst, to belch it in the Sea.

Awaked you not in this sore Agony?


No, no, my Dream was lengthened after life.
O then, began the Tempest to my Soul*
I past (me thought) the Melancholy Flood,
With that sour Ferry-man which Poets write of,
Unto the Kingdom of perpetual Night.
The first that there did greet my Stranger-soule,
Was my great Father-in-Law, renowned Warwick,
Who spoke alowd: What scourge for Perjury,
Can this dark Monarchy afford false Clarence?
And so he vanished. Then came wandering by,
A Shadow like an Angel, with bright hair
Dabbel'd in blood, and he shrieked out alowd
Clarence is come, false, fleeting, perjured Clarence,
That stabbed me in the field by Tewkesbury:
Seize on him Furies, take him unto Torment.
With that (me thought) a Legion of foul Fiends
Inuiron'd me, and howled in mine ears
Such hiddeous cries, that with the very Noise,
I (trembling) waked, and for a season after,
Could not believe, but that I was in Hell,
Such terrible Impression made my Dream.

No marvel Lord, though it affrighted you,
I am afraid (me thinks) to hear you tell it.

Ah Keeper, Keeper, I have done these things
(That now give evidence against my Soul)
For Edwards sake, and see how he requits me.
O God! if my deep prayres cannot appease thee,
But thou will be aueng'd on my misdeeds,
Yet execute thy wrath in me alone:
O spare my guiltless Wife, and my poor children.
Keeper, I prithee sit by me awhile,
My Soul is heavy, and I feign would sleep.

I will my Lord, God give your Grace good rest.


Sorrow breaks Seasons, and reposing hours,
Makes the Night Morning, and the Noontide night:
Princes have but their Titles for their Glories,
An outward Honor, for an inward Toil,
And for unfelt Imaginations
They often feel a world of restless Cares:
So that between their Titles, and low Name,
There Is nothing differs, but the outward fame.

Ho, who is here?


What would thou Fellow? And how camm'st thou hither.


I would speak with Clarence, and I came hither on my Legs.


What so brief?


It Is better (Sir) then to be tedious:
Let him see our Commission, and talk no more.

I am in this, commanded to deliver
The Noble Duke of Clarence to your hands.
I will not reason what is meant hereby,
Because I will be guiltless from the meaning.
There lies the Duke asleep, and there the Keys.
I Will to the King, and signify to him,
That thus I have resigned to you my charge.

You may sir, it is a point of wisdom:
Far you well.

What, shall we stab him as he sleeps.


No: he will say 'twas done cowardly, when he wakes


Why he shall never wake, until the great Judgment day.


Why then he will say, we stabbed him sleeping.


The urging of that word Judgment, has bred a kind of remorse in me.


What? art thou afraid?


Not to kill him, having a Warrant,
But to be damned for killing him, from the which
No Warrant can defend me.

I thought thou had bin resolute.


So I am, to let him live.


I Will back to the Duke of Glouster, and tell him so.


Nay, I prithee stay a little:
I hope this passionate humor of mine, will change,
It was wont to hold me but while one tells twenty.

How do thou feel thy self now?


Some certain dregs of conscience are yet within me.


Remember our Reward, when the deed's done.


Come, he dies: I had forgot the Reward.


Where Is thy conscience now.


O, in the Duke of Glousters purse.


When he opens his purse to give us our Reward, thy Conscience flies out.


It Is no matter, let it go: There Is few or none will entertain it.


What if it come to thee again?


I Will not meddle with it, it makes a man a Coward: A man cannot steal, but it
accuses him: A man cannot Swear, but it Checkes him: A man cannot lie with
his Neighbors Wife, but it detects him. It Is a blushing shamefaced spirit,
that mutinies in a man's bosom: It filles a man full of Obstacles. It made me
once restore a Pursse of Gold that (by chance) I found: It beggars any man that
keeps it: It is turned out of Towns and Cities for a dangerous thing, and
every man that means to live well, endeavors to trust to himself, and live
without it


It Is even now at my elbow, persuading me not to kill the Dkue.


Take the devil in thy mind, and believe him not:
He would insinuate with thee but to make thee sigh.

I am strong framed, he cannot prevail with me.


Spoke like a tall man, that respects thy reputation.
Come, shall we fall to work?

Take him on the Costard, with the hiltes of thy Sword, and then throw him into
the Malmesey-Butte in the next room


O excellent device; and make a sop of him.


Soft, he wakes.


Strike.


No, we will reason with him.


Where art thou Keeper? Give me a cup of wine.


You shall have Wine enough my Lord anon.


In Gods name, what art thou?


A man, as you are.


But not as I am Royal.


Nor you as we are, Loyal.


Thy voice is Thunder, but thy looks are humble.


My voice is now the Kings, my looks mine own.


How darkly, and how deadly do thou speak?
Your eyes do menace me: why look you pale?
Who sent you hither? Wherefore do you come?

To, to, to --


To murder me?


I, I.


You scarsely have the hearts to tell me so,
And therefore cannot have the hearts to do it.
Wherein my Friends have I offended you?

Offended us you have not, but the King.


I shall be reconciled to him again.


Never my Lord, therefore prepare to dye.


Are you drawn forth among a world of men
To slay the innocent? What is my offense?
Where is the Evidence that does accuse me?
What lawful Quest have given their Verdict up
Unto the frowning Judge? Or who pronounced
The bitter sentence of poor Clarence death,
Before I be convict by course of Law?
To threaten me with death, is most unlawful.
I charge you, as you hope for any goodness,
That you depart, and lay no hands on me:
The deed you undertake is damnable.

What we will do, we do upon command.


And he that has commanded, is our King.


Erroneous Vassals, the great King of Kings
Has in the Table of his Law commanded
That thou shall do no murder. Will you then
Spurn at his Edict, and fulfill a Man's?
Take heed: for he holds Vengeance in his hand,
To hurl upon their heads that break his Law.

And that same Vengeance does he hurl on thee,
For false Forswearing, and for murder too:
Thou did receive the Sacrament, to fight
In quarrel of the House of Lancaster.

And like a Traitor to the name of God,
Did break that Vow, and with thy treacherous blade,
Vnrip'st the Bowels of thy Sou'raignes Son.

Whom thou was it sworn to cherish and defend.


How can thou urge Gods dreadful Law to us,
When thou have broke it in such dear degree?

Alas! for whose sake did I that ill deed?
For Edward, for my Brother, for his sake.
He sends you not to murder me for this:
For in that sin, he is as deep as I.
If God will be avenged for the deed,
O know you yet, he does it publicly,
Take not the quarrel from his powrefull arm:
He needs no indirect, or lawless course,
To cut off those that have offended him.

Who made thee then a bloody minister,
When gallant springing brave Plantagenet,
That Princely Nouice was struck dead by thee?

My Brothers love, the Devil, and my Rage.


Thy Brothers Love, our Duty, and thy Faults,
Provoke us hither now, to slaughter thee.

If you do love my Brother, hate not me:
I am his Brother, and I love him well.
If you are hyr'd for meed; go back again,
And I will send you to my Brother Glouster:
Who shall reward you better for my life,
Then Edward will for tidings of my death.

You are deceived,
Your Brother Glouster hates you.

Oh no, he loves me, and he holds me dear;
Go you to him from me.

I so we will.


Tell him, when that our Princely Father York,
Blessed his three Sons with his victorious Arm,
He little thought of this divided Friendship:
Bid Glouster think on this, and he will weep.

I Milstones, as he lessoned us to weep.


O do not slander him, for he is kind.


Right, as Snow in Harvest:
Come, you deceive your self,
It Is he that sends us to destroy you here.

It cannot be, for he be wept my Fortune,
And hugged me in his arms, and swore with sobs,
That he would labor my delivery.

Why so he does, when he delivers you
From this earths thraldom, to the joys of heaven.

Make peace with God, for you must die my Lord.


Have you that holy feeling in your souls,
To counsel me to make my peace with God,
And are you yet to your own souls so blind,
That you will war with God, by murdering me.
O sirs consider, they that set you on
To do this deed, will hate you for the deed.

What shall we do?


Relent, and save your souls:
Which of you, if you were a Princes Son,
Being pent from Liberty, as I am now,
If two such murderers as your selves came to you,
Would not entreat for life, as you would beg
Were you in my distress.

Relent? no: It Is cowardly and womanish.


Not to relent, is beastly, savage, devilish:
My Friend, I spy some pity in thy looks:
O, if thine eye be not a Flatterer,
Come thou on my side, and entreat for me,
A begging Prince, what beggar pitties not.

Look behind you, my Lord.


Take that, and that, if all this will not do,
I Will drown you in the Malmesey-But within.

A bloody deed, and desperately dispatched:
How feign (like Pilate) would I wash my hands
Of this most grievous murder.

How now? what mean thou that thou help'st me not? By Heaven the Duke shall
know how slack you have been


I would he knew that I had saved his brother,
Take thou the Fee, and tell him what I say,
For I repent me that the Duke is slain.

So do not I: go Coward as thou art.
Well, I Will go hide the body in some hole,
Till that the Duke give order for his burial:
And when I have my meede, I will away,
For this will out, and then I must not stay.

Why so: now have I done a good days work.
You Peers, continue this united League:
I, every day expect an Embassage
From my Redeemer, to redeem me hence.
And more to peace my soul shall part to heaven,
Since I have made my Friends at peace on earth.
Dorset and Rivers, take each others hand,
Dissemble not your hatred, Swear your love.

By heaven, my soul is purged from grudging hate
And with my hand I seal my true hearts Love.

So thrive I, as I truly swear the like.


Take heed you dally not before your King,
Lest he that is the supreme King of Kings
Confound your hidden falsehood, and award
Either of you to be the others end.

So prosper I, as I swear perfect love.


And I, as I love Hastings with my heart,


Madam, your self is not exempt from this:
Nor you Son Dorset, Buckingham nor you;
You have been factious one against the other.
Wife, love Lord Hastings, let him kiss your hand,
And what you do, do it unfeignedly.

There Hastings, I will never more remember
Our former hatred, so thrive I, and mine.

Dorset, embrace him:
Hastings, love Lord Marquess.

This interchange of love, I here protest
Upon my part, shall be inviolable.

And so swear I.


Now Princely Buckingham, seal you this league
With thy embracements to my wives Allies,
And make me happy in your unity.

When ever Buckingham does turn his hate
Upon your Grace, but with all dutious love,
Does cherish you, and yours, God punish me
With hate in those where I expect most love,
When I have most need to employ a Friend,
And most assured that he is a Friend,
Deep, hollow, treacherous, and full of guile,
Be he unto me: This do I beg of heaven,
When I am cold in love, to you, or yours.

A pleasing Cordial, Princely Buckingham
Is this thy Vow, unto my sickely heart:
There wants now our Brother Gloucester here,
To make the blessed period of this peace.

And in good time,
Here comes Sir Richard Ratcliffe, and the Duke.

Good morrow to my Sovereign King and Queen
And Princely Peers, a happy time of day.

Happy indeed, as we have spent the day:
Gloucester, we have done deeds of Charity,
Made peace of enmity, fair love of hate,
Between these swelling wrong incensed Peers.

A blessed labor my most Sovereign Lord:
Among this Princely heap, if any here
By false intelligence, or wrong surmize
Hold me a Foe: If I unwillingly, or in my rage,
Have ought committed that is hardly borne,
To any in this presence, I desire
To reconcile me to his Friendly peace:
It Is death to me to be at enmity:
I hate it, and desire all good men's love,
First Madam, I entreat true peace of you,
Which I will purchase with my dutious service.
Of you my Noble Cousin Buckingham,
If ever any grudge were lodged between us.
Of you and you, Lord Rivers and of Dorset,
That all without desert have frowned on me:
Of you Lord Wooduill, and Lord Scales of you,
Dukes, Earls, Lords, Gentlemen, indeed of all.
I do not know that Englishman alive,
With whom my soul is any jot at odds,
More then the Infant that is borne to night:
I thank my God for my Humility.

A holy day shall this be kept hereafter:
I would to God all strifes were well compounded.
My Sovereign Lord, I do beseech your Highness
To take our Brother Clarence to your Grace.

Why Madam, have I offered love for this,
To be so flowted in this Royal presence?
Who knows not that the gentle Duke is dead?
You do him injury to scorn his Coarse.

Who knows not he is dead?
Who knows he is?

All-seeing heaven, what a world is this?


Look I so pale Lord Dorset, as the rest?


I my good Lord, and no man in the presence,
But his red color has forsook his cheeks.

Is Clarence dead? The Order was reuerst.


But he (poor man) by your first order dyed,
And that a winged Mercury did bear:
Some tardie Cripple bare the Countermand,
That came too lagge to see him buried.
God grant, that some less Noble, and less Loyal,
Nearer in bloody thoughts, and not in blood,
Deserve not worse then wretched Clarence did,
And yet go current from Suspicion.

A boon my Sovereign for my service done.


I prithee peace, my soul is full of sorrow.


I will not rise, unless your Highness hear me.


Then say at once, what is it thou requests.


The forfeit (Sovereign) of my servants life,
Who slew to day a Riotous Gentleman,
Lately attendant on the Duke of Norfolk.

Have I a tongue to doom my Brothers death?
And shall that tongue give pardon to a slave?
My Brother killed no man, his fault was Thought,
And yet his punishment was bitter death.
Who sued to me for him? Who (in my wrath)
Kneeled and my feet, and bid me be advised?
Who spoke of Brotherhood? who spoke of love?
Who told me how the poor soul did forsake
The mighty Warwick, and did fight for me?
Who told me in the field at Tewkesbury,
When Oxford had me down, he rescued me:
And said dear Brother live, and be a King*
Who told me, when we both lay in the Field,
Frozen (almost) to death, how he did lap me
Even in his Garments, and did give himself
(All thin and naked) to the numbe cold night?
All this from my Remembrance, brutish wrath
Sinfully plucked, and not a man of you
Had so much grace to put it in my mind.
But when your Carters, or your waiting Vassalls
Have done a drunken Slaughter, and defaced
The precious Image of our dear Redeemer,
You straight are on your knees for Pardon, pardon,
And I (unjustly too) must grant it you.
But for my Brother, not a man would speak,
Nor I (ungracious) speak unto my self
For him poor Soul. The proudest of you all,
Have bin beholding to him in his life:
Yet none of you, would once beg for his life.
O God! I fear thy justice will take hold
On me, and you; and mine, and yours for this.
Come Hastings help me to my Closset.
Ah poor Clarence.

This is the fruits of rashness: Marked you not,
How that the guilty Kindred of the Queen
Looked pale, when they did hear of Clarence death.
O! they did urge it still unto the King,
God will revenge it. Come Lords will you go,
To comfort Edward with our company.

We wait upon your Grace.


Good Grandam tell us, is our Father dead?


No Boy.


Why do weep so often? And beat your Breast?
And cry, O Clarence, my unhappy Son.

Why do you look on us, and shake your head,
And call us Orphans, Wretches, Castawayes,
If that our Noble Father were alive?

My pretty Cosins, you mistake me both,
I do lament the sickness of the King,
As loath to lose him, not your Fathers death:
It were lost sorrow to wail one that is lost.

Then you conclude, (my Grandam) he is dead:
The King mine Uncle is too blame for it.
God will revenge it, whom I will importune
With earnest prayers, all to that effect.

And so will I.


Peace children peace, the King does love you well.
Incapeable, and shallow Innocents,
You cannot guess who caused your Fathers death.

Grandam we can: for my good Uncle Gloucester
Told me, the King prouok'd to it by the Queen,
Devised impeachments to imprison him;
And when my Uncle told me so, he wept,
And pitied me, and kindly kissed my cheek:
Bad me rely on him, as on my Father,
And he would love me dearly as a child.

Ah! that Deceit should steal such gentle shape,
And with a virtuous Vizor hide deep vice,
He is my son, I, and therein my shame,
Yet from my dugges, he drew not this deceit.

Think you my Uncle did dissemble Grandam?


I Boy.


I cannot think it. Hark, what noise is this?


Ah! who shall hinder me to wail and weep?
To chide my Fortune, and torment my Self.
I Will join with black despair against my Soul,
And to my self, become an enemy.

What means this Scene of rude impatience?


To make an act of Tragic violence.
Edward my Lord, thy Son, our King is dead.
Why grow the Branches, when the Root is gone?
Why wither not the leaves that want their sap?
If you will live, Lament: if dye, be brief,
That our swift-winged Souls may catch the Kings,
Or like obedient Subjects follow him,
To his new Kingdom of nere-changing night.

Ah so much interest have in thy sorrow,
As I had Title in thy Noble Husband:
I have be wept a worthy Husbands death,
And lived with looking on his Images:
But now two Mirrors of his Princely semblance,
Are cracked in pieces, by malignant death,
And I for comfort, have but one false Glass,
That greeues me, when I see my shame in him.
Thou art a Widow: yet thou art a Mother,
And have the comfort of thy Children left,
But death has snatched my Husband from mine Arms,
And plucked two Crutches from my feeble hands,
Clarence, and Edward. O, what cause have I,
(Thine being but a moity of my moan)
To ouer-go thy woes, and drown thy cries.

Ah Aunt! you wept not for our Fathers death:
How can we aid you with our Kindred tears?

Our fatherless distress was left vnmoan'd,
Your widdow-dolour, likewise be vnwept.

Give me no help in Lamentation,
I am not barren to bring forth complaints:
All Springs reduce their currents to mine eyes,
That I being governed by the waterie Moon,
May send forth plenteous tears to drown the World.
Ah, for my Husband, for my dear Lord Edward.

Ah for our Father, for our dear Lord Clarence.


Alas for both, both mine Edward and Clarence.


What stay had I but Edward, and he is gone?


What stay had we but Clarence? and he is gone.


What stays had I, but they? and they are gone.


Was never widow had so dear a loss.


Were never Orphans had so dear a loss.


Was never Mother had so dear a loss.
Alas! I am the Mother of these Greefes*
Their woes are parcell'd, mine is general.
She for an Edward weeps, and so do I:
I for a Clarence weeps, so does not she:
These Babes for Clarence weep, so do not they.
Alas! you three, on me threefold distressed:
Power all your tears, I am your sorrows Nurse,
And I will pamper it with Lamentation.

Comfort dear Mother, God is much displeased,
That you take with unthankfulness his doing.
In common worldly things, it is called ungrateful,
With dull unwillingness to repay a debt,
Which with a bounteous hand was kindly lent:
Much more to be thus opposite with heaven,
For it requires the Royal debt it lent you.

Madam, bethink you like a careful Mother
Of the young Prince your son: send straight for him,
Let him be Crowned, in him your comfort lives.
Drown desperate sorrow in dead Edwards grave,
And plant your joys in living Edwards Throne.

Sister have comfort, all of us have cause
To wail the dimming of our shining Star:
But none can help our harms by wayling them.
Madam, my Mother, I do cry you mercy,
I did not see your Grace. Humbly on my knee,
I crave your Blessing.

God bless thee, and put meeknes in thy breast,
Love Charity, Obedience, and true Duty.

Amen, and make me die a good old man,
That is the butt-end of a Mothers blessing;
I marvel that her Grace did leave it out.

You clowdy-Princes, and hart-sorowing-Peeres*
That bear this heavy mutual load of Moan,
Now cheer each other, in each others Love:
Though we have spent our Harvest of this King,
We are to reap the Harvest of his Son.
The broken rancour of your high-swolne hates,
But lately splinter'd, knit, and joined together,
Must gently be preserved, cherisht, and kept:
Me seems good, that with some little Train,
Forthwith from Ludlow, the young Prince be set
Hither to London, to be crowned our King.

Why with some little Train,
My Lord of Buckingham?

Marry my Lord, least by a multitude,
The new-heal'd wound of Malice should break out,
Which would be so much the more dangerous,
By how much the estate is green, and yet vngouern'd.
Where every Horse bears his commanding Reine,
And may direct his course as please himself,
As well the fear of harm, as harm apparent,
In my opinion, ought to be prevented.

I hope the King made peace with all of us,
And the compact is firm, and true in me.

And so in me, and so (I think) in all.
Yet since it is but green, it should be put
To no apparent likelihood of breach,
Which happily by much company might be urged:
Therefore I say with Noble Buckingham,
That it is meet so few should fetch the Prince*

And so say I.


Then be it so, and go we to determine
Who they shall be that strait shall post to London.
Madam, and you my Sister, will you go
To give your censures in this business.

My Lord, who ever iournies to the Prince,
For God sake let not us two stay at home:
For by the way, I Will sort occasion,
As Index to the story we late talked of,
To part the Queens proud Kindred from the Prince.

My other self, my Counsels Consistory,
My Oracle, My Prophet, my dear Cousin,
I, as a child, will go by thy direction,
Toward London then, for we will not stay behind.

Good morrow Neighbor, whether away so fast?


I promise you, I scarsely know my self:
Hear you the news abroad?

Yes, that the King is dead.


Ill news byrlady, seldom comes the better:
I fear, I fear, 'twill prove a giddy world.

Neighbors, God speed.


Give you good morrow sir.


Does the news hold of good king Edwards death?


I sir, it is too true, God help the while.


Then Masters look to see a troublous world.


No, no, by Gods good grace, his Son shall reign.


Woe to that Land that is governed by a Child.


In him there is a hope of Government,
Which in his nonage, counsel under him,
And in his full and ripened years, himself
No doubt shall then, and till then govern well.

So stood the State, when Henry the sixth
Was crowned in Paris, but at nine months old.

Stood the State so? No, no, good friends, God wot
For then this Land was famously enriched
With politic grave Counsel; then the King
Had virtuous Uncles to protect his Grace.

Why so has this, both by his Father and Mother.


Better it were they all came by his Father:
Or by his Father there were none at all:
For emulation, who shall now be nearest,
Will touch us all too near, if God prevent not.
O full of danger is the Duke of Glouster,
And the Queens Sons, and Brothers, haught and proud:
And were they to be ruled, and not to rule,
This sickly Land, might solace as before.

Come, come, we fear the worst: all will be well.


When Clouds are seen, wisemen put on their clokes;
When great leaves fall, then Winter is at hand;
When the Sun sets, who does not look for night?
Untimely storms, makes men expect a Dearth:
All may be well; but if God sort it so,
It Is more then we deserve, or I expect.

Truly, the hearts of men are full of fear:
You cannot reason (almost) with a man,
That looks not heavily, and full of dread.

Before the days of Change, still is it so,
By a divine instinct, men's minds mistrust
Pursuing danger: as by proof we see
The Water swell before a boyst'rous storm:
But leave it all to God. Whither away?

Marry we were sent for to the Justices.


And so was I: I Will bear you company.


Last night I heard they lay at Stony Stratford,
And at Northampton they do rest to night:
To morrow, or next day, they will be here.

I long with all my heart to see the Prince:
I hope he is much grown since last I saw him.

But I hear no, they say my son of York
Has almost ouertane him in his growth.

I Mother, but I would not have it so.


Why my good Cousin, it is good to grow.


Grandam, one night as we did sit at Supper,
My Uncle Rivers talked how I did grow
More then my Brother. I, quoth my Uncle Glouster,
Small Herbs have grace, great Weeds do grow apace.
And since, me thinks I would not grow so fast,
Because sweet Flowers are slow, and Weeds make have.

Good faith, good faith, the saying did not hold
In him that did object the same to thee.
He was the wretched'st thing when he was young,
So long a growing, and so leysurely,
That if his rule were true, he should be gracious.

And so no doubt he is, my gracious Madam.


I hope he is, but yet let Mothers doubt.


Now by my troth, if I had been remembered,
I could have given my Uncles Grace, a flout,
To touch his growth, nearer then he touched mine.

How my young York,
I prithee let me hear it.

Marry (they say) my Uncle grew so fast,
That he could gnaw a crust at two hours old,
'Twas full two years ere I could get a tooth.
Grandam, this would have been a biting Jest.

I prithee pretty York, who told thee this?


Grandam, his Nursse.


His Nurse? why she was dead, ere you wast borne.


If 'twere not she, I cannot tell who told me.


A parlous Boy: go too, you are too shrewd.


Good Madam, be not angry with the Child.


Pitchers have ears.


Here comes a Messenger: What News?


Such news my Lord, as greeues me to report.


How does the Prince?


Well Madam, and in health.


What is thy News?


Lord Rivers, and Lord Gray,
Are sent to Pomfret, and with them,
Sir Thomas Vaughan, Prisoners.

Who has committed them?


The mighty Dukes, Glouster and Buckingham.


For what offense?


The sum of all I can, I have disclosed:
Why, or for what, the Nobles were committed,
Is all unknown to me, my gracious Lord.

Aye me! I see the ruin of my House:
The Tiger now has seized the gentle Hind,
Insulting Tyranny begins to Iutt
Upon the innocent and awelesse Throne:
Welcome Destruction, Blood, and Massacre,
I see (as in a Map) the end of all.

Accursed, and unquiet wrangling days,
How many of you have mine eyes beheld?
My Husband lost his life, to get the Crown,
And often up and down my sons were tossed
For me to joy, and weep, their gain and loss.
And being seated, and Domesticke broils
Clean ouer-blowne, themselves the Conquerors,
Make war upon themselves, Brother to Brother;
Blood to blood, self against self: O prepostorous
And frantic outrage, and thy damned spleen,
Or let me dye, to look on earth no more.

Come, come my Boy, we will to Sanctuary*
Madam, farewell.

Stay, I will go with you.


You have no cause.


My gracious Lady go,
And thither bear your Treasure and your Goods,
For my part, I Will resign unto your Grace
The Seal I keep, and so betide to me,
As well I tender you, and all of yours.
Go, I Will conduct you to the Sanctuary.

Welcome sweet Prince to London,
To your Chamber.

Welcome dear Cousin, my thoughts Soueraign
The weary way has made you Melancholy.

No Uncle, but our crosses on the way,
Have made it tedious, wearisome, and heavy.
I want more Uncles here to welcome me.

Sweet Prince, the untainted virtue of your years
Has not yet diu'd into the Worlds deceit:
No more can you distinguish of a man,
Then of his outward show, which God he knows,
Seldom or never iumpeth with the heart.
Those Uncles which you want, were dangerous:
Your Grace attended to their Sugared words,
But looked not on the poison of their hearts:
God keep you from them, and from such false Friends.

God keep me from false Friends,
But they were none.

My Lord, the Mayor of London comes to greet you.


God bless your Grace, with health and happy days.


I thank you, good my Lord, and thank you all:
I thought my Mother, and my Brother York,
Would long, ere this, have met us on the way.
Fie, what a Slug is Hastings, that he comes not
To tell us, whether they will come, or no.

And in good time, here comes the sweating Lord.


Welcome, my Lord: what, will our Mother come?


On what occasion God he knows, not I;
The Queen your Mother, and your Brother York,
Have taken Sanctuary: The tender Prince
Would feign have come with me, to meet your Grace,
But by his Mother was perforce withheld.

Fie, what an indirect and peevish course
Is this of hers? Lord Cardinal, will your Grace
Persuade the Queen, to send the Duke of York
Unto his Princely Brother presently?
If she deny, Lord Hastings go with him,
And from her jealous Arms pluck him perforce.

My Lord of Buckingham, if my weak Oratorie
Can from his Mother win the Duke of York,
Anon expect him here: but if she be obdurate
To mild entreaties, God forbid
We should infringe the holy Privilege
Of blessed Sanctuary: not for all this Land,
Would I be guilty of so great a sin.

You are too senseless obstinate, my Lord,
Too ceremonious, and traditionall.
Weigh it but with the grossness of this Age,
You break not Sanctuary, in seizing him:
The benefit thereof is always granted
To those, whose dealings have deserved the place,
And those who have the wit to claim the place:
This Prince has neither claym'd it, nor deserved it,
And therefore, in mine opinion, cannot have it.
Then taking him from thence, that is not there,
You break no Privilege, nor Charter there:
Often have I heard of Sanctuary men,
But Sanctuary children, never till now.

My Lord, you shall o're-rule my mind for once.
Come on, Lord Hastings, will you go with me?

I go, my Lord.


Good Lords, make all the speedy have you may.
Say, Uncle Gloucester, if our Brother come,
Where shall we soiourne, till our Coronation?

Where it think best unto your Royal self.
If I may counsel you, some day or two
Your Highness shall repose you at the Tower:
Then where you please, and shall be thought most fit
For your best health, and recreation.

I do not like the Tower, of any place:
Did Julius Caesar build that place, my Lord?

He did, my gracious Lord, begin that place,
Which since, succeeding Ages have re-edify'd.

Is it upon record? or else reported
Successively from age to age, he built it?

Upon record, my gracious Lord.


But say, my Lord, it were not registered,
Me thinks the truth should live from age to age,
As 'twere retayl'd to all posterity,
Even to the general ending day.

So wise, so young, they say do never live long.


What say you, Uncle?


I say, without Characters, Fame lives long.
Thus, like the formal Vice, Iniquity,
I morallize two meanings in one word.

That Julius Caesar was a famous man,
With what his Valor did enrich his Wit,
His Wit set down, to make his Valor live:
Death makes no Conquest of his Conqueror,
For now he lives in Fame, though not in Life.
I Will tell you what, my Cousin Buckingham.

What, my gracious Lord?


And if I live until I be a man,
I Will win our ancient Right in France again,
Or dye a Soldier, as I lived a King.

Short Summers lightly have a forward Spring.


Now in good time, here comes the Duke of York.


Richard of York, how fares our Noble Brother?


Well, my dear Lord, so must I call you now.


I, Brother, to our grief, as it is yours:
Too late he died, that might have kept that Title,
Which by his death has lost much Majesty.

How fares our Cousin, Noble Lord of York?


I thank you, gentle Uncle. O my Lord,
You said, that idle Weeds are fast in growth:
The Prince, my Brother, has out-growne me far.

He has, my Lord.


And therefore is he idle?


Oh my fair Cousin, I must not say so.


Then he is more beholding to you, then I.


He may command me as my Sovereign,
But you have power in me, as in a Kinsman.

I pray you, Uncle, give me this Dagger.


My Dagger, little Cousin? with all my heart.


A Beggar, Brother?


Of my kind Uncle, that I know will give,
And being but a Toy, which is no grief to give.

A greater gift then that, I Will give my Cousin.


A greater gift? O, that is the Sword to it.


I, gentle Cousin, were it light enough.


O then I see, you will part but with light gifts,
In weightier things you will say a Beggar nay.

It is too weighty for your Grace to wear.


I weigh it lightly, were it heavier.


What, would you have my Weapon, little Lord?


I would that I might thank you, as, as, you call me.


How?


Little.


My Lord of York will still be cross in talk:
Uncle, your Grace knows how to bear with him.

You mean to bear me, not to bear with me:
Uncle, my Brother mockes both you and me,
Because that I am little, like an Ape,
He thinks that you should bear me on your shoulders.

With what a sharp provided wit he reasons:
To mittigate the scorn he gives his Uncle,
He prettily and aptly taunts himself:
So cunning, and so young, is wonderful.

My Lord, wilt please you pass along?
My self, and my good Cousin Buckingham,
Will to your Mother, to entreat of her
To meet you at the Tower, and welcome you.

What, will you go unto the Tower, my Lord?


My Lord Protector will have it so.


I shall not sleep in quiet at the Tower.


Why, what should you fear?


Marry, my Uncle Clarence angry Ghost:
My Grandam told me he was murdered there.

I fear no Uncles dead.


Nor none that live, I hope.


And if they live, I hope I need not fear.
But come my Lord: and with a heavy heart,
Thinking on them, go I unto the Tower.

Think you, my Lord, this little prating York
Was not incensed by his subtle Mother,
To taunt and scorn you thus opprobriously?

No doubt, no doubt: Oh it is a perilous Boy,
Bold, quick, ingenious, forward, capable:
He is all the Mothers, from the top to toe.

Well, let them rest: Come hither Catesby,
Thou art sworn as deeply to effect what we intend,
As closely to conceal what we impart:
Thou know our reasons urged upon the way.
What think thou? is it not an easy matter,
To make William Lord Hastings of our mind,
For the installment of this Noble Duke
In the Seat Royal of this famous I Will?

He for his fathers sake so loves the Prince,
That he will not be won to ought against him.

What think thou then of Stanley? Will not he?


He will do all in all as Hastings does.


Well then, no more but this:
Go gentle Catesby, and as it were far off,
Sound thou Lord Hastings,
How he does stand affected to our purpose,
And summon him to morrow to the Tower,
To sit about the Coronation.
If thou do find him tractable to us,
Encourage him, and tell him all our reasons:
If he be leaden, ycie, cold, unwilling,
Be thou so too, and so break off the talk,
And give us notice of his inclination:
For we to morrow hold divided Councels,
Wherein thy self shall highly be employed.

Commend me to Lord William: tell him Catesby,
His ancient Knot of dangerous Adversaries
To morrow are let blood at Pomfret Castle,
And bid my Lord, for joy of this good news,
Give Mistress Shore one gentle Kiss the more.

Good Catesby, go effect this business soundly.


My good Lords both, with all the heed I can.


Shall we hear from you, Catesby, ere we sleep?


You shall, my Lord.


At Crosby House, there shall you find us both.


Now, my Lord,
What shall we do, if we perceive
Lord Hastings will not yield to our Complots?

Chop off his Head:
Something we will determine:
And look when I am King, claim thou of me
The Earldom of Hereford, and all the moueables
Whereof the King, my Brother, was possessed.

I Will claim that promise at your Graces hand.


And look to have it yielded with all kindness*
Come, let us suppe betimes, that afterward
We may digest our complots in some form.

My Lord, my Lord.


Who knockes?


One from the Lord Stanley.


What is it a Clock?


Upon the stroke of four.


Cannot my Lord Stanley sleep these tedious Nights?


So it appears, by that I have to say:
First, he commends him to your Noble self.

What then?


Then certifies your Lordship, that this Night
He dreamt, the Bore had rased off his Helm:
Besides, he says there are two Councels kept;
And that may be determined at the one,
Which may make you and him to rue at the other.
Therefore he sends to know your Lordships pleasure,
If you will presently take Horse with him,
And with all speed post with him toward the North,
To shun the danger that his Soul divines.

Go fellow, go, return unto thy Lord,
Bid him not fear the separated Council:
His Honor and my self are at the one,
And at the other, is my good friend Catesby;
Where nothing can proceed, that touches us,
Whereof I shall not have intelligence:
Tell him his Fears are shallow, without instance.
And for his Dreams, I wonder he is so simple,
To trust the mock'ry of unquiet slumbers.
To fly the Bore, before the Bore pursues,
Were to incense the Bore to follow us,
And make pursuit, where he did mean no chase.
Go, bid thy Master rise, and come to me,
And we will both together to the Tower,
Where he shall see the Bore will use us kindly.

I Will go, my Lord, and tell him what you say.


Many good morrowes to my Noble Lord.


Good morrow Catesby, you are early stirring:
What news, what news, in this our tottering State?

It is a reeling World indeed, my Lord:
And I believe will never stand upright,
Till Richard wear the Garland of the Realm.

How wear the Garland?
Do thou mean the Crown?

I, my good Lord.


I Will have this Crown of mine cut from my shoulders,
Before I Will see the Crown so foul mis-plac'd:
But can thou guess, that he does aim at it?

I, on my life, and hopes to find you forward,
Upon his party, for the gain thereof:
And thereupon he sends you this good news,
That this same very day your enemies.
The Kindred of the Queen, must dye at Pomfret.

Indeed I am no mourner for that news,
Because they have been still my adversaries:
But, that I Will give my voice on Richards side,
To bar my Masters Heirs in true Descent,
God knows I will not do it, to the death.

God keep your Lordship in that gracious mind.


But I shall laugh at this a twelue-month hence,
That they which brought me in my Masters hate,
I live to look upon their Tragedy.
Well Catesby, ere a fort-night make me older,
I Will send some packing, that yet think not on it.

It Is a vile thing to dye, my gracious Lord,
When men are vnprepar'd, and look not for it.

O monstrous, monstrous! and so falls it out
With Rivers Vaughan, Gray: and so 'twill do
With some men else, that think themselves as safe
As thou and I, who (as thou know) are dear
To Princely Richard, and to Buckingham.

The Princes both make high account of you,
For they account his Head upon the Bridge.

I know they do, and I have well deserved it.
Come on, come on, where is your Bore-speare man?
Fear you the Bore, and go so unprovided?

My Lord good morrow, good morrow Catesby:
You may jest on, but by the holy Rood,
I do not like these several Councels, I.

My Lord, I hold my Life as dear as yours,
And never in my days, I do protest,
Was it so precious to me, as it is now:
Think you, but that I know our state secure,
I would be so triumphant as I am?

The Lords at Pomfret* when they rode from London,
Were iocund, and supposed their states were sure,
And they indeed had no cause to mistrust:
But yet you see, how soon the Day o're-cast.
This sudden stab of Rancour I misdoubt:
Pray God (I say) I prove a needless Coward.
What, shall we toward the Tower? the day is spent.

Come, come, have with you:
Wot you what, my Lord,
To day the Lords you talk of, are beheaded.

They, for their truth, might better wear their Heads,
Then some that have accused them, wear their Hats.
But come, my Lord, let us away.

Go on before, I Will talk with this good fellow.
How now, Sirrah? how goes the World with thee?

The better, that your Lordship please to ask.


I tell thee man, it is better with me now,
Then when thou met'st me last, where now we meet:
Then was I going Prisoner to the Tower,
By the suggestion of the Queens Allies.
But now I tell thee (keep it to thy self)
This day those Enemies are put to death,
And I in better state then ere I was.

God hold it, to your Honors good content.


Gramercie fellow: there, drink that for me.


I thank your Honor.


Well met, my Lord, I am glad to see your Honor.


I thank thee, good Sir John, with all my heart.
I am in your debt, for your last Exercise:
Come the next Sabbath, and I will content you.

I Will wait upon your Lordship.


What, talking with a Priest, Lord Chamberlain?
Your friends at Pomfret, they do need the Priest,
Your Honor has no shriuing work in hand.

Good faith, and when I met this holy man,
The men you talk of, came into my mind.
What, go you toward the Tower?

I do, my Lord, but long I cannot stay there:
I shall return before your Lordship, thence.

Nay like enough, for I stay Dinner there.


And Supper too, although thou know it not.
Come, will you go?

I Will wait upon your Lordship.


Sir Richard Ratcliffe, let me tell thee this,
To day shall thou behold a Subject die,
For Truth, for Duty, and for Loyalty.

God bless the Prince from all the Pack of you,
A Knot you are, of damned Blood-suckers.

You live, that shall cry woe for this hereafter.


Dispatch, the limit of your Lives is out.


O Pomfret, Pomfret! O thou bloody Prison!
Fatal and ominous to Noble Peers:
Within the guilty Closure of thy Walls,
Richard the Second here was hackt to death:
And for more slander to thy dismal Seat,
We give to thee our guiltless blood to drink.

Now Margarets Curse is fallen upon our Heads,
When she exclaimed on Hastings, you, and I,
For standing by, when Richard stabbed her Son.

Then cursed she Richard,
Then cursed she Buckingham,
Then cursed she Hastings. Oh remember God,
To hear her prayer for them, as now for us:
And for my Sister, and her Princely Sons,
Be satisfied, dear God, with our true blood,
Which, as thou know, unjustly must be spilt.

Make haste, the hour of death is expiate.


Come Gray, come Vaughan, let us here embrace.
Farewell, until we meet again in Heaven.

Now Noble Peers, the cause why we are met,
Is to determine of the Coronation:
In Gods Name speak, when is the Royal day?

Is all things ready for the Royal time?


It is, and wants but nomination.


To morrow then I judge a happy day.


Who knows the Lord Protectors mind herein?
Who is most inward with the Noble Duke?

Your Grace, we think, should soonest know his mind.


We know each others Faces: for our Hearts,
He knows no more of mine, then I of yours,
Or I of his, my Lord, then you of mine:
Lord Hastings, you and he are near in love.

I thank his Grace, I know he loves me well:
But for his purpose in the Coronation,
I have not sounded him, nor he delivered
His gracious pleasure any way therein:
But you, my Honorable Lords, may name the time,
And in the Dukes behalf I Will give my Voice,
Which I presume he will take in gentle part.

In happy time, here comes the Duke himself.


My Noble Lords, and Cousins all, good morrow:
I have been long a sleeper: but I trust,
My absence does neglect no great design,
Which by my presence might have been concluded.

Had you not come upon your O my Lord,
William, Lord Hastings, had pronounced your part;
I mean your Voice, for Crowning of the King.

Then my Lord Hastings, no man might be bolder,
His Lordship knows me well, and loves me well.
My Lord of Ely, when I was last in Holborne,
I saw good Strawberries in your Garden there,
I do beseech you, send for some of them.

Mary and will, my Lord, with all my heart.


Cousin of Buckingham, a word with you.
Catesby has sounded Hastings in our business,
And finds the testie Gentleman so hot,
That he will lose his Head, ere give consent
His Masters Child, as worshipfully he terms it,
Shall lose the Royalty of Englands Throne.

Withdraw your self a while, I Will go with you.


We have not yet set down this day of Triumph:
To morrow, in my judgment, is too sudden,
For I my self am not so well provided,
As else I would be, were the day prolonged.

Where is my Lord, the Duke of Gloucester?
I have sent for these Strawberries.

His Grace looks cheerfully and smooth this morning,
There Is some conceit or other likes him well,
When that he bids good morrow with such spirit.
I think there is never a man in Christendom
Can lesser hide his love, or hate, then he,
For by his Face straight shall you know his Heart.

What of his Heart perceive you in his Face,
By any liuelyhood he showed to day?

Mary, that with no man here he is offended:
For were he, he had shown it in his Looks.

I pray you all, tell me what they deserve,
That do conspire my death with devilish Plots
Of damned Witchcraft, and that have prevailed
Upon my Body with their Hellish Charms.

The tender love I bear your Grace, my Lord,
Makes me most forward, in this Princely presence,
To doom the Offenders, whosoever they be:
I say, my Lord, they have deserved death.

Then be your eyes the witness of their evil.
Look how I am bewitched: behold, mine Arm
Is like a blasted Sapling, withered up:
And this is Edwards Wife, that monstrous Witch,
Consorted with that Harlot, Strumpet Shore,
That by their Witchcraft thus have marked me.

If they have done this deed, my Noble Lord.


If? thou Protector of this damned Strumpet,
Talk thou to me of Ifs: thou art a Traitor,
Off with his Head; now by Saint Paul I swear,
I will not dine, until I see the same.
Louell and Ratcliffe, look that it be done:
The rest that love me, rise, and follow me.

Woe, woe for England, not a whit for me,
For I, too fond, might have prevented this:
Stanley did dream, the Bore did rowse our Helmes,
And I did scorn it, and disdain to fly:
Three times to day my Foot-Cloth-Horse did stumble,
And started, when he looked upon the Tower,
As loath to bear me to the slaughterhouse.
O now I need the Priest, that spoke to me:
I now repent I told the Pursuiuant,
As too triumphing, how mine Enemies
To day at Pomfret bloodily were butchered,
And I my self secure, in grace and favor.
Oh Margaret, Margaret, now thy heavy Curse
Is lighted on poor Hastings wretched Head.

Come, come, dispatch, the Duke would be at dinner:
Make a short Shrift, he longs to see your Head.

O momentarie grace of mortal men,
Which we more hunt for, then the grace of God!
Who builds his hope in air of your good Looks,
Lives like a drunken Sayler on a Mast,
Ready with every Nod to tumble down,
Into the fatal Bowels of the Deep.

Come, come, dispatch, it is bootlesse to exclaim.


O bloody Richard: miserable England,
I prophecy the fearefull'st time to thee,
That ever wretched Age has looked upon.
Come, lead me to the Block, bear him my Head,
They smile at me, who shortly shall be dead.

Come Cousin,
Can thou quake, and change thy color,
Murder thy breath in middle of a word,
And then again begin, and stop again,
As if thou were distraught, and mad with terror?

Tut, I can counterfeit the deep Tragedian,
Speak, and look back, and pry on every side,
Tremble and start at wagging of a Straw:
Intending deep suspicion, ghastly Looks
Are at my service, like enforced Smiles;
And both are ready in their Offices,
At any time to grace my Stratagemes.
But what, is Catesby gone?

He is, and see he brings the Mayor along.


Lord Mayor.


Look to the Drawbridge there.


Hark, a Drum.


Catesby, o're-looke the Walls.


Lord Mayor, the reason we have sent.


Look back, defend thee, here are Enemies.


God and our Innocence defend, and guard us.


Be patient, they are friends: Ratcliffe, and Louell.


Here is the Head of that ignoble Traitor,
The dangerous and unsuspected Hastings.

So dear I loved the man, that I must weep:
I took him for the plainest harmless Creature,
That breathed upon the Earth, a Christian.
Made him my Book, wherein my Soul recorded
The History of all her secret thoughts.
So smooth he daubed his Vice with show of Virtue,
That his apparent open Guilt omitted,
I mean, his Conversation with Shores Wife,
He lived from all attainder of suspects.

Well, well, he was the couertst sheltred Traitor
That ever lived.
Would you imagine, or almost believe,
Were not, that by great preservation
We live to tell it, that the subtle Traitor
This day had plotted, in the Councell-House,
To murder me, and my good Lord of Gloucester.

Had he done so?


What? think you we are Turks, or Infidels?
Or that we would, against the form of Law,
Proceed thus rashly in the Villains death,
But that the extreme peril of the case,
The Peace of England, and our Persons safety,
Enforced us to this Execution.

Now fair befall you, he deserved his death,
And your good Graces both have well proceeded,
To warn false Traitors from the like Attempts.

I never looked for better at his hands,
After he once fell in with Mistress Shore:
Yet had we not determined he should dye,
Until your Lordship came to see his end,
Which now the loving haste of these our friends,
Something against our meanings, have prevented;
Because, my Lord, I would have had you heard
The Traitor speak, and timorously confess
The manner and the purpose of his Treasons:
That you might well have signified the same
Unto the Citizens, who happily may
Misconster us in him, and wayle his death.

But, my good Lord, your Graces words shall serve,
As well as I had seen, and heard him speak:
And do not doubt, right Noble Princes both,
But I Will acquaint our dutious Citizens
With all your just proceedings in this case.

And to that end we wished your Lordship here,
TO avoid the Censures of the carping World.

Which since you come too late of our intent,
Yet witness what you hear we did intend:
And so, my good Lord Mayor, we bid farewell.

Go after, after, Cousin Buckingham.
The Mayor toward Guild Hall hyes him in all post:
There, at your meetest vantage of the time,
Infer the Bastardie of Edwards Children:
Tell them, how Edward put to death a Citizen,
Only for saying, he would make his Son
Heir to the Crown, meaning indeed his House,
Which, by the Sign thereof, was termed so.
Moreover, urge his hateful Luxury,
And beastiall appetite in change of Lust,
Which stretched unto their Servants, Daughters, Wives,
Even where his raging eye, or savage heart,
Without control, lusted to make a prey.
Nay, for a need, thus far come near my Person:
Tell them, when that my Mother went with Child
Of that insatiate Edward; Noble York,
My Princely Father, then had Wars in France,
And by true computation of the time,
Found, that the Issue was not his begot:
Which well appeared in his Lineaments,
Being nothing like the Noble Duke, my Father:
Yet touch this sparingly, as 'twere far off,
Because, my Lord, you know my Mother lives.

Doubt not, my Lord, I Will play the Orator,
As if the Golden Fee, for which I plead,
Were for my self: and so, my Lord, adue.

If you thrive well, bring them to Baynards Castle,
Where you shall find me well accompanied
With reverend Fathers, and well-learned Bishops.

I go, and toward three or four a Clock
Look for the News that the Guild Hall affoords.

Go Louell with all speed to Doctor Shaw,
Go thou to Friar Peuker, bid them both
Meet me within this hour at Baynards Castle.
Now will I go to take some privy order,
To draw the Brats of Clarence out of sight,
And to give order, that no manner person
Have any time recourse unto the Princes.

Here is the Indictment of the good Lord Hastings,
Which in a set Hand fairly is engrossed,
That it may be to day read over in Paul's.
And mark how well the sequel hangs together:
Eleven hours I have spent to write it over,
For yester-night by Catesby was it sent me,
The Precedent was full as long a doing,
And yet within these five hours Hastings lived,
Untainted, vnexamin'd, free, at liberty.
Here Is a good World the while.
Who is so gross, that cannot see this palpable device?
Yet who so bold, but says he sees it not?
Bad is the World, and all will come to naught,
When such ill dealing must be seen in thought.

How now, how now, what say the Citizens?


Now by the holy Mother of our Lord,
The Citizens are mum, say not a word.

Touched you the Bastardie of Edwards Children?


I did, with his Contract with Lady Lucy,
And his Contract by Deputy in France,
The unsatiate greediness of his desire,
And his enforcement of the City Wives,
His Tyranny for Trifles, his own Bastardie,
As being got, your Father then in France,
And his resemblance, being not like the Duke.
Withal, I did infer your Lineaments,
Being the right Idea of your Father,
Both in your form, and Nobleness of Mind:
Laid open all your Victories in Scotland,
Your Discipline in War, Wisdom in Peace,
Your Bounty, Virtue, fair Humility:
Indeed, left nothing fitting for your purpose,
Untouched, or slightly handled in discourse.
And when my Oratorie drew toward end,
I bid them that did love their Countries good,
Cry, God save Richard, Englands Royal King.

And did they so?


No, so God help me, they spoke not a word,
But like dumb Statues, or breathing Stones,
Star'd each on other, and looked deadly pale:
Which when I saw, I reprehended them,
And asked the Mayor, what meant this wilful silence?
His answer was, the people were not used
To be spoke to, but by the Recorder.
Then he was urged to tell my Tale again:
Thus says the Duke, thus has the Duke inferred,
But nothing spoke, in warrant from himself.
When he had done, some followers of mine own,
At lower end of the Hall, hurld up their Caps,
And some ten voices cried, God save King Richard:
And thus I took the vantage of those few.
Thanks gentle Citizens, and friends, quoth I,
This general applause, and cheerful showt,
Argues your wisdom, and your love to Richard:
And even here brake off, and came away.

What tongue-lesse Blocks were they,
Would they not speak?
Will not the Mayor then, and his Brethren, come?

The Mayor is here at hand: intend some fear,
Be not you spoke with, but by mighty suit:
And look you get a Prayer-Booke in your hand,
And stand between two Churchmen, good my Lord,
For on that ground I Will make a holy Descant:
And be not easily won to our requests,
Play the Maids part, still answer nay, and take it.

I go: and if you plead as well for them,
As I can say nay to thee for my self,
No doubt we bring it to a happy issue.

Go, go up to the Leads, the Lord Mayor knocks.
Welcome, my Lord, I dance attendance here,
I think the Duke will not be spoke withal.

Now Catesby, what says your Lord to my request?


He does entreat your Grace, my Noble Lord,
To visit him to morrow, or next day:
He is within, with two right reverend Fathers,
Divinely bent to Meditation,
And in no Worldly suites would he be moved,
To draw him from his holy Exercise.

Return, good Catesby, to the gracious Duke,
Tell him, my self, the Mayor and Aldermen,
In deep designs, in matter of great moment,
No less importing then our general good,
Are come to have some conference with his Grace.

I Will signify so much unto him straight.


Ah ha, my Lord, this Prince is not an Edward,
He is not lulling on a lewd Loue-Bed,
But on his Knees, at Meditation:
Not dallying with a Brace of Curtizans,
But meditating with two deep Divines:
Not sleeping, to engrosse his idle Body,
But praying, to enrich his watchful Soul.
Happy were England, would this virtuous Prince
Take on his Grace the Sovereignty thereof.
But sure I fear we shall not win him to it.

Marry God defend his Grace should say us nay.


I fear he will: here Catesby comes again.
Now Catesby, what says his Grace?

He wonders to what end you have assembled
Such troops of Citizens, to come to him,
His Grace not being warned thereof before:
He fears, my Lord, you mean no good to him.

Sorry I am, my Noble Cousin should
Suspect me, that I mean no good to him:
By Heaven, we come to him in perfect love,
And so once more return, and tell his Grace.
When holy and devout Religious men
Are at their Beads, it is much to draw them thence,
So sweet is zealous Contemplation.

See where his Grace stands, tweene two Clergy men.


Two Props of Virtue, for a Christian Prince,
To stay him from the fall of Vanity:
And see a Book of Prayer in his hand,
True Ornaments to know a holy man.
Famous Plantagenet, most gracious Prince,
Lend favorable ear to our requests,
And pardon us the interruption
Of thy Devotion, and right Christian Zeal.

My Lord, there needs no such Apology:
I do beseech your Grace to pardon me,
Who earnest in the service of my God,
Deferred the visitation of my friends.
But leaving this, what is your Graces pleasure?

Even that (I hope) which pleases God above,
And all good men, of this vngouern'd I Will.

I do suspect I have done some offense,
That seems disgracious in the Cities eye,
And that you come to reprehend my ignorance.

You have, my Lord:
Would it might please your Grace,
On our entreaties, to amend your fault.

Else wherefore breathe I in a Christian Land.


Know then, it is your fault, that you resign
The Supreme Seat, the Throne Maiesticall,
The Sceptred Office of your Ancestors,
Your State of Fortune, and your Deaw of Birth,
The Lineall Glory of your Royal House,
To the corruption of a blemished Stock;
Whiles in the mildness of your sleepie thoughts,
Which here we waken to our Countries good,
The Noble I Will does want his proper Limbs:
His Face defaced with skarres of Infamy,
His Royal Stock grafft with ignoble Plants,
And almost shouldred in the swallowing Gulf
Of dark Forgetfulness, and deep Oblivion.
Which to recure, we heartily solicit
Your gracious self to take on you the charge
And Kingly Government of this your Land:
Not as Protector, Steward, Substitute,
Or lowly Factor, for another gain;
But as successively, from Blood to Blood,
Your Right of Birth, your Empyrie, your own.
For this, consorted with the Citizens,
Your very Worshipful and loving friends,
And by their vehement instigation,
In this just Cause come I to move your Grace.

I cannot tell, if to depart in silence,
Or bitterly to speak in your reproof,
Best fitteth my Degree, or your Condition.
If not to answer, you might happily think,
Tongue-ty'd Ambition, not replying, yielded
To bear the Golden Yoke of Sovereignty,
Which fondly you would here impose on me.
If to reprove you for this suit of yours,
So seasoned with your faithful love to me,
Then on the other side I checked my friends.
Therefore to speak, and to avoid the first,
And then in speaking, not to incur the last,
Definitiuely thus I answer you.
Your love deserves my thanks, but my desert
Vnmeritable, shunnes your high request.
First, if all Obstacles were cut away,
And that my Path were even to the Crown,
As the ripe Revenue, and due of Birth:
Yet so much is my poverty of spirit,
So mighty, and so many my defects,
That I would rather hide me from my Greatness,
Being a Bark to brook no mighty Sea;
Then in my Greatness covet to be hid,
And in the vapor of my Glory smothered.
But God be thanked, there is no need of me,
And much I need to help you, were there need:
The Royal Tree has left us Royal Fruit,
Which mellow'd by the stealing hours of time,
Will well become the Seat of Majesty,
And make (no doubt) us happy by his Reign.
On him I lay that, you would lay on me,
The Right and Fortune of his happy Stars,
Which God defend that I should wring from him.

My Lord, this argues Conscience in your Grace,
But the respects thereof are nice, and triuiall,
All circumstances well considered.
You say, that Edward is your Brothers Son,
So say we too, but not by Edwards Wife:
For first was be contract to Lady Lucie,
Your Mother lives a Witness to his Vow;
And afterward by substitute betrothed
To Bona, Sister to the King of France.
These both put off, a poor Petitioner,
A Care-cras'd Mother to a many Sons,
A Beautie-waining, and distressed Widow,
Even in the afternoon of her best days,
Made prize and purchase of his wanton Eye,
Seduced the pitch, and height of his degree,
To base declension, and loathed Bigamie.
By her, in his unlawful Bed, he got
This Edward, whom our Manners call the Prince.
More bitterly could I expostulate,
Save that for reverence to some alive,
I give a sparing limit to my Tongue.
Then good, my Lord, take to your Royal self
This proffered benefit of Dignity:
If not to bless us and the Land withal,
Yet to draw forth your Noble Ancestrie
From the corruption of abusing times,
Unto a Lineall true derived course.

Do good my Lord, your Citizens entreat you.


Refuse not, mighty Lord, this proffered love.


O make them joyful, grant their lawful suit.


Alas, why would you heap this Care on me?
I am unfit for State, and Majesty:
I do beseech you take it not amiss,
I cannot, nor I will not yield to you.

If you refuse it, as in love and zeal,
Loath to depose the Child, your Brothers Son,
As well we know your tenderness of heart,
And gentle, kind, effeminate remorse,
Which we have noted in you to your Kindred,
And egally indeed to all Estates;
Yet know, where you accept our suit, or no,
Your Brothers Son shall never reign our King,
But we will plant some other in the Throne,
To the disgrace and downe-fall of your House:
And in this resolution here we leave you.
Come Citizens, we will entreat no more.

Call him again, sweet Prince, accept their suit:
If you deny them, all the Land will rue it.

Will you enforce me to a world of Cares.
Call them again, I am not made of Stones,
But penetrable to your kind entreaties,
Albeit against my Conscience and my Soul.
Cousin of Buckingham, and sage grave men,
Since you will buckle fortune on my back,
To bear her burden, where I will or no.
I must have patience to endure the Load:
But if black Scandal, or foule-fac'd Reproach,
Attend the sequel of your Imposition,
Your mere enforcement shall acquittance me
From all the impure blots and staynes thereof;
For God does know, and you may partly see,
How far I am from the desire of this.

God bless your Grace, we see it, and will say it.


In saying so, you shall but say the truth.

Then I salute you with this Royal Title,
Long live King Richard, Englands worthy King.

Amen.


To morrow may it please you to be Crowned.


Even when you please, for you will have it so.


To morrow then we will attend your Grace,
And so most joyfully we take our leave.

Come, let us to our holy Work again.
Farewell my Cousins, farewell gentle friends.

Who meets us here?
My Niece Plantagenet,
Led in the hand of her kind Aunt of Gloucester?
Now, for my Life, she is wandering to the Tower,
On pure hearts love, to greet the tender Prince.
Daughter, well met.

God give your Graces both, a happy
And a joyful time of day.

As much to you, good Sister: whither away?


No farther then the Tower, and as I guess,
Upon the like devotion as your selves,
To gratulate the gentle Princes there.

Kind Sister thanks, we will enter all together:
And in good time, here the Lieutenant comes.
Master Lieutenant, pray you, by your leave,
How does the Prince, and my young Son of York?

Right well, dear Madame: by your patience,
I may not suffer you to visit them,
The King has strictly charged the contrary.

The King? who is that?


I mean, the Lord Protector.


The Lord protect him from that Kingly Title.
Has he set bounds between their love, and me?
I am their Mother, who shall bar me from them?

I am their Fathers Mother, I will see them.


Their Aunt I am in law, in love their Mother:
Then bring me to their sights, I Will bear thy blame,
And take thy Office from thee, on my peril.

No, Madame, no; I may not leave it so:
I am bound by Oath, and therefore pardon me.

Let me but meet you Ladies one hour hence,
And I Will salute your Grace of York as Mother,
And reverend looker on of two fair Queens,
Come Madame, you must straight to Westminster,
There to be crowned Richards Royal Queen.

Ah, cut my Lace asunder,
That my pent heart may have some scope to beat,
Or else I swoone with this dead-killing news.

Despightfull tidings, O unpleasing news.


Be of good cheer: Mother, how fares your Grace?


O Dorset, speak not to me, get thee gone,
Death and Destruction dogs thee at thy heels,
Thy Mothers Name is ominous to Children.
If thou will outstrip Death, go cross the Seas,
And live with Richmond, from the reach of Hell.
Go hye thee, hye thee from this slaughterhouse,
Lest thou increase the number of the dead,
And make me dye the thrall of Margarets Curse,
Nor Mother, Wife, nor Englands counted Queen.

Full of wise care, is this your counsel, Madame:
Take all the swift advantage of the hours:
You shall have Letters from me to my Son,
In your behalf, to meet you on the way:
Be not taken tardie by unwise delay.

O ill dispersing* Wind of Misery,
O my accursed Womb, the Bed of Death:
A Cockatrice have thou hatched to the World.
Whose vnauoided Eye is murtherous.

Come, Madame, come, I in all haste was sent.


And I with all unwillingness will go.
O would to God, that the inclusiue Verge
Of Golden Metal, that must round my Brow,
Were red hot Steel, to sear me to the Brains,
Anointed let me be with deadly Venom,
And dye ere men can say, God save the Queen.

Go, go, poor soul, I envy not thy glory,
To feed my humor, wish thy self no harm.

No: why? When he that is my Husband now,
Came to me, as I followed Venries Corse.
When scarce the blood was well washed from his hands,
Which issued from my other Angel Husband,
And that dear Saint, which then I weeping followed:
O, when I say I looked on Richards Face,
This was my Wish: Be thou (quoth I) accursed,
For making me, so young, so old a Widow:
And when thou wed'st, let sorrow haunt thy Bed;
And be thy Wife, if any be so mad,
More miserable, by the Life of thee,
Then thou have made me, by my dear Lords death.
Lo, ere I can repeat this Curse again,
Within so small a time, my Woman's heart
Grossly grew captive to his honey words,
And proved the subject of mine own Souls Curse,
Which hitherto has held mine eyes from rest:
For never yet one hour in his Bed
Did I enjoy the golden deaw of sleep,
But with his timorous Dreams was still awaked.
Besides, he hates me for my Father Warwick,
And will (no doubt) shortly be rid of me.

Poor heart adieu, I pity thy complaining.


No more, then with my soul I mourn for yours.


Farewell, thou woeful welcommer of glory.


Adieu, poor soul, that take thy leave of it.


Go thou to Richmond, and good fortune guide thee,
Go thou to Richard, and good Angels tend thee,
Go thou to Sanctuary, and good thoughts possess thee,
I to my Grave, where peace and rest lie with me.
Eighty odd years of sorrow have I seen,
And each hours joy wrackt with a week of teene.

Stay, yet look back with me unto the Tower.
Pity, you ancient Stones, those tender Babes,
Whom Envy has immured within your Walls,
Rough Cradle for such little pretty ones,
Rude ragged Nurse, old sullen Play-fellow,
For tender Princes: use my Babies well;
So foolish Sorrows bids your Stones farewell.

Stand all apart. Cousin of Buckingham.


My gracious Sovereign.


Give me thy hand.
Thus high, by thy advice, and thy assistance,
Is King Richard seated:
But shall we wear these Glories for a day?
Or shall they last, and we rejoice in them?

Still live they, and for ever let them last.


Ah Buckingham, now do I play the Touch,
To try if thou be current Gold indeed:
Young Edward lives, think now what I would speak.

Say on my loving Lord.


Why Buckingham, I say I would be King.


Why so you are, my thrice-renowned Lord.


Ha? am I King? it is so: but Edward lives.


True, Noble Prince.


O bitter consequence!
That Edward still should live true Noble Prince.
Cousin, thou wast not wont to be so dull.
Shall I be plain? I wish the Bastards dead,
And I would have it suddenly performed.
What say thou now? speak suddenly, be brief.

Your Grace may do your pleasure.


Tut, tut, thou art all Ice, thy kindness freezes:
Say, have I thy consent, that they shall dye?

Give me some little breath, some pawse, dear Lord,
Before I positiuely speak in this:
I will resolve you herein presently.

The King is angry, see he gnawes his Lip.


I will converse with Iron-witted Fools,
And vnrespectiue Boys: none are for me,
That look into me with considerate eyes,
High-reaching Buckingham grows circumspect.
Boy.

My Lord.


Know thou not any, whom corrupting Gold
Will tempt unto a close exploit of Death?

I know a discontented Gentleman,
Whose humble means match not his haughty spirit:
Gold were as good as twenty Orators,
And will (no doubt) tempt him to any thing.

What is his Name?


His Name, my Lord, is Tirrell.


I partly know the man: go call him hither, Boy.
The deep reuoluing witty Buckingham,
No more shall be the neighbor to my counsels.
Has he so long held out with me, vntyr'd,
And stops he now for breath? Well, be it so.
How now, Lord Stanley, what is the news?

Know my loving Lord, the Marquess Dorset
As I hear, is fled to Richmond,
In the parts where he abides.

Come hither Catesby, rumor it abroad,
That Anne my Wife is very grievous sick,
I will take order for her keeping close.
Inquire me out some mean poor Gentleman,
Whom I will marry straight to Clarence Daughter:
The Boy is foolish, and I fear not him.
Look how thou dream'st: I say again, give out,
That Anne, my Queen, is sick, and like to dye.
About it, for it stands me much upon
To stop all hopes, whose growth may damage me.
I must be married to my Brothers Daughter,
Or else my Kingdom stands on brittle Glass:
Murder her Brothers, and then marry her,
Uncertain way of gain. But I am in
So far in blood, that sin will pluck on sin,
Teare-falling Pity dwells not in this Eye.
Is thy Name Tyrrel?

James Tyrrel, and your most obedient subject.


Art thou indeed?


Prove me, my gracious Lord.


Dare thou resolve to kill a friend of mine?


Please you:
But I had rather kill two enemies.

Why then thou have it: two deep enemies.
Foes to my Rest, and my sweet sleeps disturbers,
Are they that I would have thee deal upon:
Tyrrel, I mean those Bastards in the Tower.

Let me have open means to come to them,
And soon I Will rid you from the fear of them.

Thou sing'st sweet Music:
Hark, come hither Tyrrel,
Go by this token: rise, and lend thine Ear,
There is no more but so: say it is done,
And I will love thee, and prefer thee for it.

I will dispatch it straight.


My Lord, I have considered in my mind,
The late request that you did sound me in.

Well, let that rest: Dorset is fled to Richmond.


I hear the news, my Lord.


Stanley, he is your Wives Son: well, look unto it.


My Lord, I claim the gift, my due by promise,
For which your Honor and your Faith is pawned,
The Earldom of Hertford, and the moueables,
Which you have promised I shall possess.

Stanley look to your Wife: if she convey
Letters to Richmond, you shall answer it.

What says your Highness to my just request?


I do remember me, Henry the Sixth
Did prophecy, that Richmond should be King,
When Richmond was a little peevish Boy.
A King perhaps.

May it please you to resolve me in my suit.


Thou troublest me, I am not in the vain.


And is it thus? repayes he my deep service
With such contempt? made I him King for this?
O let me think on Hastings, and be gone
To Brecnock, while my fearful Head is on.

The tyrannous and bloody Act is done,
The most arch deed of pittious massacre
That ever yet this Land was guilty of:
Dighton and Forest, who I did suborne
To do this piece of ruthful Butchery,
Albeit they were flesht Villains, bloody Dogs,
Melted with tenderness, and mild compassion,
Wept like to Children, in their deaths sad Story.
O thus (quoth Dighton) lay the gentle Babes:
Thus, thus (quoth Forest) girdling one another
Within their Alablaster innocent Arms:
Their lips were four red Roses on a stalk,
And in their Summer Beauty kissed each other.
A Book of Prayers on their pillow lay,
Which one (quoth Forest) almost changed my mind:
But oh the Devil, there the Villain stopped:
When Dighton thus told on, we smothered
The most replenished sweet work of Nature,
That from the prime Creation ere she framed.
Hence both are gone with Conscience and Remorse,
They could not speak, and so I left them both,
To bear this tidings to the bloody King.
And here he comes. All health my Sovereign Lord.

Kind Tirrell, am I happy in thy News.


If to have done the thing you gave in charge,
Be get your happiness, be happy then,
For it is done.

But did thou see them dead.


I did my Lord.


And buried gentle Tirrell.


The Chaplain of the Tower has buried them,
But where (to say the truth) I do not know.

Come to me Tirrel soon, and after Supper,
When thou shall tell the process of their death.
Mean time, but think how I may do the good,
And be inheritor of thy desire.
Farewell till then.

I humbly take my leave.


The Son of Clarence have I pent up close,
His daughter meanly have I matched in marriage,
The Sons of Edward sleep in Abraham's bosom,
And Anne my wife has bid this world good night,
Now for I know the Britain Richmond aims
At young Elizabeth my brothers daughter,
And by that knot looks proudly on the Crown,
To her go I, a jolly thriuing wooer.

My Lord.


Good or bad news, that thou come in so bluntly?


Bad news my Lord, Mourton is fled to Richmond,
And Buckingham backed with the hardy Welshmen
Is in the field, and still his power increases.

Ely with Richmond troubles me more near,
Then Buckingham and his rash levied Strength.
Come, I have learned, that fearful commenting
Is leaden seruitor to dull delay.
Delay leds impotent and Snaile-pac'd Beggary:
Then fiery expedition be my wing,
Jove's Mercury, and Herald for a King:
Go muster men: My counsel is my Sheeld,
We must be brief, when Traitors brave the Field.

So now prosperity begins to mellow,
And drop into the rotten mouth of death:
Here in these Confines slily have I lurkt,
To watch the waining of mine enemies.
A dire induction, am I witness to,
And will to France, hoping the consequence
Will prove as bitter, black, and Tragical.
Withdraw thee wretched Margaret, who comes here?

Ah my poor Princes! ah my tender Babes:
My vnblowed Flowers, new appearing sweets:
If yet your gentle souls fly in the Air,
And be not fixed in doom perpetual,
Houer about me with your ayery wings,
And hear your mothers Lamentation.

Houer about her, say that right for right
Has dimmed your Infant morn, to Aged night.

So many miseries have crazed my voice,
That my woe-wearied tongue is still and mute.
Edward Plantagenet, why art thou dead?

Plantagenet does quit Plantagenet,
Edward for Edward, pays a dying debt.

Will thou, O God, fly from such gentle Lambs,
And throw them in the intrailes of the Wolf?
When did thou sleep, when such a deed was done?

When holy Harry dyed, and my sweet Son.


Dead life, blind sight, poor mortal living ghost,
Woes Scene, Worlds shame, Graves due, by life usurped,
Brief abstract and record of tedious days,
Rest thy unrest on Englands lawful earth,
Unlawfully made drunk with innocent blood.

Ah that thou would as soon afford a Grave,
As thou can yield a melancholy sear:
Then would I hide my bones, not rest them here,
Ah who has any cause to mourn but we?

If ancient sorrow be most reverent,
Give mine the benefit of signeurie,
And let my greefes frown on the upper hand
If sorrow can admit Society.
I had an Edward, till a Richard killed him:
I had a Husband, till a Richard killed him:
Thou had an Edward, till a Richard killed him:
Thou had a Richard, till a Richard killed him.

I had a Richard too, and thou did kill him;
I had a Rutland too, thou hop'st to kill him.

Thou had a Clarence too,
And Richard killed him.
From forth the kennell of thy womb has crept
A Hell-hound that does hunt us all to death:
That Dog, that had his teeth before his eyes,
To wor^y Lambs, and lap their gentle blood:
That foul defacer of Gods handy work:
That reigns in gauled eyes of weeping souls:
That excellent grand Tyrant of the earth,
Thy womb let loose to chase us to our graves.
O upright, just, and true-disposing God,
How do I thank thee, that this carnal Curre
Prays on the issue of his Mothers body,
And makes her Pue-fellow with others moan.

Oh Harries wife, triumph not in my woes:
God witness with me, I have wept for thine.

Bear with me: I am hungry for revenge,
And now I cloy me with beholding it.
Thy Edward he is dead, that killed my Edward,
The other Edward dead, to quit my Edward:
Young York, he is but boot, because both they
Matched not the high perfection of my loss.
Thy Clarence he is dead, that stabbed my Edward,
And the beholders of this frantic play,
The adulterate Hastings, Rivers, Vaughan, Gray,
Untimely smothered in their dusky Graves.
Richard yet lives, Hels black Intelligencer,
Only reserved their Factor, to buy souls,
And send them thither: But at hand, at hand
Insues his pittious and vnpittied end.
Earth gapes, Hell burns, Fiends roar, Saints pray,
To have him suddenly conuey'd from hence:
Cancel his bond of life, dear God I pray,
That I may live and say, The Dog is dead.

O thou did prophecy, the time would come,
That I should wish for thee to help me curse
That bottel'd Spider, that foul bunch-back'd Toad.

I called thee then, vain flourish of my fortune:
I called thee then, poor Shadow, painted Queen,
The presentation of but what I was;
The flattering Index of a direful Pageant;
One heau'd a high, to be hurled down below:
A Mother only mocked with two fair Babes;
A dream of what thou wast, a garish Flagge
To be the aim of every dangerous Shot;
A sign of Dignity, a Breath, a Bubble;
A Queen in jest, only to fill the Scene.
Where is thy Husband now? Where be thy Brothers?
Where be thy two Sons? Wherein do thou Joy?
Who sues, and kneeles, and says, God save the Queen?
Where be the bending Peers that flattered thee?
Where be the thronging Troops that followed thee?
Decline all this, and see what now thou art.
For happy Wife, a most distressed Widow:
For joyful Mother, one that wailes the name:
For one being sued too, one that humbly sues:
For Queen, a very Caytiffe, crowned with care:
For she that scorned at me, now scorned of me:
For she being feared of all, now fearing one:
For she commanding all, obeyed of none.
Thus has the course of Justice whirled about,
And left thee but a very prey to time,
Having no more but Thought of what thou wast.
To torture thee the more, being what thou art,
Thou did usurp my place, and do thou not
Usurp the just proportion of my Sorrow?
Now thy proud Neck, bears half my burdened yoke,
From which, even here I slip my wearied head,
And leave the burden of it all, on thee.
Farewell Yorkes wife, and Queen of sad mischance,
These English woes, shall make me smile in France.

O thou well skilled in Curses, stay awhile,
And teach me how to curse mine enemies.

Forbear to sleep the night, and fast the day:
Compare dead happiness, with living woe:
Think that thy Babes were sweeter then they were,
And he that slew them fowler then he is:
Bett'ring thy loss, makes the bad causer worse,
Reuoluing this, will teach thee how to Curse.

My words are dull, O quicken them with thine.


Thy woes will make them sharp,
And pierce like mine.

Why should calamity be full of words?


Windy Atturnies to their Clients Woes,
Ayery succeeders of intestine joys,
Poor breathing Orators of miseries,
Let them have scope, though what they will impart,
Help nothing else, yet do they ease the heart.

If so then, be not Tongue-ty'd: go with me,
And in the breath of bitter words, let us smother
My damned Son, that thy two sweet Sons smothered.
The Trumpet sounds, be copious in exclaimes.

Who intercepts me in my Expedition?


O she, that might have intercepted thee
By strangling thee in her accursed womb,
From all the slaughters (Wretch) that thou have done.

Hid'st thou that Forhead with a Golden Crown
Where't should be branded, if that right were right?
The slaughter of the Prince that owed that Crown,
And the dyre death of my poor Sons, and Brothers.
Tell me thou Villaine-flaue, where are my Children?

Thou Toad, thou Toade,
Where is thy Brother Clarence?
And little Ned Plantagenet his Son?

Where is the gentle Rivers, Vaughan, Gray?


Where is kind Hastings?


A flourish Trumpets, strike Alarm Drums:
Let not the Heavens hear these Tell-tale women
Rail on the Lords Anointed. Strike I say.
Either be patient, and entreat me fair,
Or with the clamorous report of War,
Thus will I drown your exclamations.

Art thou my Son?


I, I thank God, my Father, and your self.


Then patiently hear my impatience.


Madam, I have a touch of your condition,
That cannot brook the accent of reproof.

O let me speak.


Do then, but I Will not hear.


I will be mild, and gentle in my words.


And brief (good Mother) for I am in have.


Art thou so hasty? I have staid for thee
(God knows) in torment and in agony.

And came I not at last to comfort you?


No by the holy Rood, thou know it well,
Thou came on earth, to make the earth my Hell.
A grievous burden was thy Birth to me,
Tetchy and wayward was thy Infancy.
Thy School-daies frightfull, desperate, wild, and furious,
Thy prime of Manhood, daring, bold, and venturous:
Thy Age confirmed, proud, subtle, slye, and bloody,
More mild, but yet more harmfull; Kind in hatred:
What comfortable hour can thou name,
That ever graced me with thy company?

Faith none, but Humfrey Hour,
That called your Grace
To Breakefast once, forth of my company.
If I be so disgracious in your eye,
Let me march on, and not offend you Madam.
Strike up the Drum.

I prithee hear me speak.


You speak too bitterly.


Hear me a word:
For I shall never speak to thee again.

So.


Either thou will dye, by Gods just ordinance
Ere from this war thou turn a Conqueror:
Or I with grief and extreme Age shall perish,
And never more behold thy face again.
Therefore take with thee my most grievous Curse,
Which in the day of Battle tire thee more
Then all the complete Armor that thou wear'st.
My Prayers on the adverse party fight,
And there the little souls of Edwards Children,
Whisper the Spirits of thine Enemies,
And promise them Success and Victory:
Bloody thou art, bloody will be thy end:
Shame serves thy life, and does thy death attend.

Though far more cause, yet much less spirit to curse
Abides in me, I say Amen to her.

Stay Madam, I must talk a word with you.


I have no more sons of the Royal Blood
For thee to slaughter. For my Daughters (Richard)
They shall be praying Nuns, not weeping Queens:
And therefore level not to hit their lives.

You have a daughter called Elizabeth,
Virtuous and Fair, Royal and Gracious?

And must she dye for this? O let her live,
And I Will corrupt her Manners, stain her Beauty,
Slander my Self, as false to Edwards bed:
Throw over her the veil of Infamy,
So she may live vnscarr'd of bleeding slaughter,
I will confess she was not Edwards daughter.

Wrong not her Birth, she is a Royal Princess.


To save her life, I Will say she is not so.


Her life is safest only in her birth.


And only in that safety, dyed her Brothers.


Lo at their Birth, good stars were opposite.


No, to their lives, ill friends were contrary.


All vnauoyded is the doom of Destiny.


True: when avoided grace makes Destiny.
My Babes were destined to a fairer death,
If grace had blessed thee with a fairer life.

You speak as if that I had slain my Cosins?


Cosins indeed, and by their Uncle couzend,
Of Comfort, Kingdom, Kindred, Freedom, Life,
Whose hand soever lanch'd their tender hearts,
Thy head (all indirectly) gave direction.
No doubt the murderous Knife was dull and blunt,
Till it was whetted on thy stone-hard heart,
To revel in the Intrailes of my Lambs.
But that still use of grief, makes wild grief tame,
My tongue should to thy ears not name my Boys,
Till that my Nails were anchored in thine eyes:
And I in such a desperate Bay of death,
Like a poor Bark, of sails and tackling rose,
Rush all to pieces on thy Rocky bosom.

Madam, so thrive I in my enterprise
And dangerous success of bloody wars,
As I intend more good to you and yours,
Then ever you and yours by me were harmed.

What good is covered with the face of heaven,
To be discovered, that can do me good.

The advancement of your children, gentle Lady


Up to some Scaffold, there to lose their heads.


Unto the dignity and height of Fortune,
The high Imperial Type of this earths glory.

Flatter my sorrow with report of it:
Tell me, what State, what Dignity, what Honor,
Can thou demise to any child of mine.

Even all I have; I, and my self and all,
Will I withal indow a child of thine:
So in the Lethe of thy angry soul,
Thou drown the sad remembrance of those wrongs,
Which thou supposest I have done to thee.

Be brief, least that the process of thy kindness
Last longer telling then thy kindness date.

Then know,
That from my Soul, I love thy Daughter.

My daughters Mother thinks it with her soul.


What do you think?


That thou do love my daughter from thy soul
So from thy Souls love did thou love her Brothers,
And from my hearts love, I do thank thee for it.

Be not so hasty to confound my meaning:
I mean that with my Soul I love thy daughter,
And do intend to make her Queen of England.

Well then, who do you mean shallbe her King.


Even he that makes her Queen:
Who else should be?

What, thou?


Even so: How think you of it?


How can thou woo her?


That I would learn of you,
As one being best acquainted with her humor.

And will thou learn of me?


Madam, with all my heart.


Send to her by the man that slew her Brothers,
A pair of bleeding hearts: thereon ingraue
Edward and York, then happily will she weep:
Therefore present to her, as sometime Margaret
Did to thy Father, steept in Rutlands blood,
A hand-kercheefe, which say to her did dreyne
The purple sap from her sweet Brothers body,
And bid her wipe her weeping eyes withal.
If this inducement move her not to love,
Send her a Letter of thy Noble deeds:
Tell her, thou made away her Uncle Clarence,
Her Uncle Rivers, I (and for her sake)
Made quick conueyance with her good Aunt Anne.

You mock me Madam, this not the way
To win your daughter.

There is no other way,
Unless thou could put on some other shape,
And not be Richard, that has done all this.

Say that I did all this for love of her.


Nay then indeed she cannot choose but hate thee
Having bought love, with such a bloody spoil.

Look what is done, cannot be now amended:
Men shall deal unadvisedly sometimes,
Which after-houres gives leisure to repent.
If I did take the Kingdom from your Sons,
To make amends, I Will give it to your daughter:
If I have killed the issue of your womb,
To quicken your increase, I will beget
Mine issue of your blood, upon your Daughter:
A Grandams name is little less in love,
Then is the doting Title of a Mother;
They are as Children but one step below,
Even of your metal, of your very blood:
Of all one pain, save for a night of groans
Endured of her, for whom you bid like sorrow.
Your Children were vexation to your youth,
But mine shall be a comfort to your Age,
The loss you have, is but a Son being King,
And by that loss, your Daughter is made Queen.
I cannot make you what amends I would,
Therefore accept such kindness as I can.
Dorset your Son, that with a fearful soul
Leads discontented steps in Foreign soil,
This fair Alliance, quickly shall call home
To high Promotions, and great Dignity.
The King that calls your beauteous Daughter Wife,
Familiarly shall call thy Dorset, Brother:
Again shall you be Mother to a King:
And all the Ruins of distressefull Times,
Repayr'd with double Riches of Content.
What? we have many goodly days to see:
The liquid drops of Tears that you have shed,
Shall come again, transformed to Orient Pearl,
Aduantaging their Love, with interest
Oftentimes double gain of happiness.
Go then (my Mother) to thy Daughter go,
Make bold her bashful years, with your experience,
Prepare her ears to hear a Woers Tale.
Put in her tender heart, the aspiring Flame
Of Golden Sovereignty: Acquaint the Princess
With the sweet silent hours of Marriage joys:
And when this Arm of mine has chastised
The petty Rebel, dull-brain'd Buckingham,
Bound with Triumphant Garlands will I come,
And lead thy daughter to a Conquerors bed:
To whom I will retaile my Conquest won,
And she shall be sole Victoresse, Caesar's Caesar.

What were I best to say, her Fathers Brother
Would be her Lord? Or shall I say her Uncle?
Or he that slew her Brothers, and her Uncles?
Under what Title shall I woo for thee,
That God, the Law, my Honor, and her Love,
Can make seem pleasing to her tender years?

Infer fair Englands peace by this Alliance.


Which she shall purchase with still lasting war.


Tell her, the King that may command, entreats.


That at her hands, which the kings King forbids.


Say she shall be a High and Mighty Queen.


To veil the Title, as her Mother does.


Say I will love her everlastingly.


But how long shall that title ever last?


Sweetly in force, unto her fair lives end.


But how long fairly shall her sweet life last?


As long as Heaven and Nature lengthens it.


As long as Hell and Richard likes of it.


Say, I her Sovereign, am her Subject low.


But she your Subject, lothes such Sovereignty.


Be eloquent in my behalf to her.


An honest tale speeds best, being plainly told.


Then plainly to her, tell my loving tale.


Plain and not honest, is too harsh a style.


Your Reasons are too shallow, and to quick.


O no, my Reasons are too deep and dead,
Too deep and dead (poor Infants) in their graves,
Harp on it still shall I, till heart strings break.

Harp not on that string Madam, that is past.
Now by my George, my Garter, and my Crown.

Profaned, dishonored, and the third usurped.


I swear.


By nothing, for this is no Oath:
Thy George profaned, has lost his Lordly Honor;
Thy Garter blemished, pawned his Knightly Virtue;
Thy Crown usurped, disgraced his Kingly Glory:
If something thou would swear to be believed,
Swear then by something, that thou have not wronged.

Then by my Self.


Thy Self, is selfe-misvs'd.


Now by the World.


It Is full of thy foul wrongs.


My Fathers death.


Thy life has it dishonored.


Why then, by Heaven.


Heavens wrong is most of all:
If thou didd'st fear to break an Oath with him,
The unity the King my husband made,
Thou had not broken, nor my Brothers died.
If thou had feared to break an oath by him,
The Imperial metal, circling now thy head,
Had graced the tender temples of my Child,
And both the Princes had been breathing here,
Which now two tender Bed-fellowes for dust,
Thy broken Faith has made the prey for Worms.
What can thou swear by now.

The time to come.


That thou have wronged in the time ore-past:
For I my self have many tears to wash
Hereafter time, for time past, wronged by thee.
The Children live, whose Fathers thou have slaughtered,
Vngouern'd youth, to wail it with their age:
The Parents live, whose Children thou have butchered,
Old barren Plants, to wail it with their Age.
Swear not by time to come, for that thou have
Misvs'd ere used, by times ill-vs'd repast.

As I entend to prosper, and repent:
So thrive I in my dangerous Affairs
Of hostile Arms: My self, my self confound:
Heaven, and Fortune bar me happy hours:
Day, yield me not thy light; nor Night, thy rest.
Be opposite all Planets of good luck
To my proceeding, if with dear hearts love,
Immaculate devotion, holy thoughts,
I tender not thy beauteous Princely daughter.
In her, consists my Happiness, and thine:
Without her, follows to my self, and thee;
Her self, the Land, and many a Christian soul,
Death, Desolation, Ruin, and Decay:
It cannot be avoided, but by this:
It will not be avoided, but by this.
Therefore dear Mother (I must call you so)
Be the Attorney of my love to her:
Plead what I will be, not what I have been;
Not my deserts, but what I will deserve:
Urge the Necessity and state of times,
And be not peevish found, in great Designs.

Shall I be tempted of the Devil thus?


I, if the Devil tempt you to do good.


Shall I forget my self, to be my self.


I, if your selfs remembrance wrong your self.


Yet thou did kill my Children.


But in your daughters womb I bury them.
Where in that Nest of Spicery they will breed
Selves of themselves, to your recomforture.

Shall I go win my daughter to thy will?


And be a happy Mother by the deed.


I go, write to me very shortly,
And you shall understand from me her mind.

Bear her my true loves kiss, and so farewell.
Relenting Fool, and shallow-changing Woman.
How now, what news?

Most mighty Sovereign, on the Western Coast
Rides a puissant Navy: to our Shores
Throng many doubtful hollow-hearted friends,
Unarmed, and vnresolu'd to beat them back.
It Is thought, that Richmond is their Admiral:
And there they hull, expecting but the aid
Of Buckingham, to welcome them ashore.

Some light-foot friend post to ye Duke of Norfolk:
Ratcliffe thy self, or Catesby, where is he?

Here, my good Lord.


Catesby, fly to the Duke.


I will, my Lord, with all convenient haste.


Catesby come hither, post to Salisbury:
When thou come thither: Dull unmindful Villain,
Why stay'st thou here, and go not to the Duke?

First, mighty Liege, tell me your Highness pleasure,
What from your Grace I shall deliver to him.

O true, good Catesby, bid him levy straight
The greatest strength and power that he can make,
And meet me suddenly at Salisbury.

I go.


What, may it please you, shall I do at Salisbury?


Why, what would thou do there, before I go?


Your Highness told me I should post before.


My mind is changed:
Stanley, what news with you?

None, good my Liege, to please you with ye hearing,
Nor none so bad, but well may be reported.

Hoyday, a Riddle, neither good nor bad:
What need'st thou run so many miles about,
When thou may tell thy Tale the nearest way?
Once more, what news?

Richmond is on the Seas.


There let him sink, and be the Seas on him,
White-liuer'd Runnagate, what does he there?

I know not, mighty Sovereign, but by guess.


Well, as you guess.


Stirred up by Dorset, Buckingham, and Morton,
He makes for England, here to claim the Crown.

Is the Chair empty? is the Sword vnsway'd?
Is the King dead? the Empire vnpossest?
What Heir of York is there alive, but we?
And who is Englands King, but great Yorkes Heir?
Then tell me, what makes he upon the Seas?

Unless for that, my Liege, I cannot guess.


Unless for that he comes to be your Liege,
You cannot guess wherefore the Welchman comes.
Thou will revolt, and fly to him, I fear.

No, my good Lord, therefore mistrust me not.


Where is thy Power then, to beat him back?
Where be thy Tenants, and thy followers?
Are they not now upon the Western Shore,
Safe-conducting the Rebels from their Ships?

No, my good Lord, my friends are in the North.


Cold friends to me: what do they in the North,
When they should serve their Sovereign in the West?

They have not been commanded, mighty King:
Pleases your Majesty to give me leave,
I Will muster up my friends, and meet your Grace,
Where, and what time your Majesty shall please.

I, thou would be gone, to join with Richmond:
But I Will not trust thee.

Most mighty Sovereign,
You have no cause to hold my friendship doubtful,
I never was, nor never will be false.

Go then, and muster men: but leave behind
Your Son George Stanley: look your heart be firm,
Or else his Heads assurance is but frail.

So deal with him, as I prove true to you.


My gracious Sovereign, now in Devonshire,
As I by friends am well advertised,
Sir Edward Courtney, and the haughty Prelate,
Bishop of Exeter, his elder Brother,
With many more Confederates, are in Arms.

In Kent, my Liege, the Guilfords are in Arms,
And every hour more Competitors
Flock to the Rebels, and their power grows strong.

My Lord, the Army of great Buckingham.


Out on ye, Owls, nothing but Songs of Death,
There, take thou that, till thou bring better news.

The news I have to tell your Majesty,
Is, that by sudden Floods, and fall of Waters,
Buckinghams Army is dispersed and scattered,
And he himself wandered away alone,
No man knows whither.

I cry thee mercy:
There is my Purse, to cure that Blow of thine.
Has any well-aduised friend proclaym'd
Reward to him that brings the Traitor in?

Such Proclamation has been made, my Lord.


Sir Thomas Louell, and Lord Marquess Dorset,
It Is said, my Liege, in Yorkshire are in Arms:
But this good comfort bring I to your Highness,
The Britain Navy is dispersed by Tempest.
Richmond in Dorsetshire sent out a Boat
Unto the shore, to ask those on the Banks,
If they were his Assistants, yea, or no?
Who answered him, they came from Buckingham,
Upon his party: he mistrusting them,
Hoys'd sail, and made his course again for Britain.

March on, march on, since we are up in Arms,
If not to fight with foreign Enemies,
Yet to beat down these Rebels here at home.

My Liege, the Duke of Buckingham is taken,
That is the best news: that the Earl of Richmond
Is with a mighty power Landed at Milford,
Is colder News, but yet they must be told.

Away toward Salsbury, while we reason here,
A Royal batteil might be won and lost:
Some one take order Buckingham be brought
To Salsbury, the rest march on with me.

Sir Christopher, tell Richmond this from me,
That in the stye of the most deadly Bore,
My Son George Stanley is frankt up in hold:
If I revolt, off goes young Georges head,
The fear of that, holds off my present aid.
So get thee gone: commend me to thy Lord.
Withal say, that the Queen has heartily consented
He should espouse Elizabeth her daughter.
But tell me, where is Princely Richmond now?

At Penbroke, or at Hertford West in Wales.


What men of Name resort to him.


Sir Walter Herbert, a renowned Soldier,
Sir Gilbert Talbot, Sir William Stanley,
Oxford, redoubted Pembroke, Sir James Blunt,
And Rice ap Thomas, with a valiant Crew,
And many other of great name and worth:
And toward London do they bend their power,
If by the way they be not fought withal.

Well hye thee to thy Lord: I kiss his hand,
My Letter will resolve him of my mind.
Farewell.

Will not King Richard let me speak with him?


No my good Lord, therefore be patient.


Hastings, and Edwards children, Gray and Rivers,
Holy King Henry, and thy fair Son Edward,
Vaughan, and all that have miscarried
By underhand corrupted foul injustice,
If that your moody discontented souls,
Do through the clouds behold this present hour,
Even for revenge mock my destruction.
This is All-soules day (Fellow) is it not?

It is.


Why then Al-soules day, is my bodies doomsday
This is the day, which in King Edwards time
I wished might fall on me, when I was found
False to his Children, and his Wives Allies.
This is the day, wherein I wished to fall
By the false Faith of him whom most I trusted.
This, this All-soules day to my fearful Soul,
Is the determined respit of my wrongs:
That high All-seer, which I dallied with,
Has turned my fained Prayer on my head,
And given in earnest, what I begged in jest.
Thus does he force the swords of wicked men
To turn their own points in their Masters bosoms.
Thus Margarets curse falls heavy on my neck:
When he (quoth she) shall split thy heart with sorrow,
Remember Margaret was a Prophetess:
Come lead me Officers to the block of shame,
Wrong has but wrong, and blame the due of blame.

Fellows in Arms, and my most loving Friends
Bruised underneath the yoke of Tyranny,
Thus far into the bowels of the Land,
Have we marched on without impediment;
And here receive we from our Father Stanley
Lines of fair comfort and encouragement:
The wretched, bloody, and usurping Boar,
(That spoiled your Summer Fields, and fruitful Vines)
Swilles your warm blood like wash, and makes his trough
In your embowel'd bosoms: This foul Swine
Is now even in the Centry of this Isle,
Never to the Town of Leicester, as we learn:
From Tamworth thither, is but one days march.
In Gods name cheerely on, courageous Friends,
To reap the Harvest of perpetual peace,
By this one bloody trial of sharp War.

Every man's Conscience is a thousand men,
To sight against this guilty Homicide.

I doubt not but his Friends will turn to us.


He has no friends, but what are friends for fear,
Which in his dearest need will fly from him.

All for our vantage, then in Gods name march,
True Hope is swift, and flies with Swallows wings,
Kings it makes Gods, and meaner creatures Kings.

Here pitch our Tent, even here in Bosworth field,
My Lord of Surrey, why look you so sad?

My heart is ten times lighter then my looks.


My Lord of Norfolk.


Here most gracious Liege.


Norfolk, we must have knockes:
Ha, must we not?

We must both give and take my loving Lord.


Up with my Tent, here will I lie to night,
But where to morrow? Well, all is one for that
Who has descried the number of the Traitors?

Six or seven thousand is their utmost power.


Why our Battalia trebbles that account:
Besides, the Kings name is a Tower of strength,
Which they upon the adverse Faction want.
Up with the Tent: Come Noble Gentlemen,
Let us survey the vantage of the ground.
Call for some men of found direction:
Let Us lack no Discipline, make no delay,
For Lords, to morrow is a busy day.

The weary Sun, has made a Golden set,
And by the bright Tract of his fiery Carre,
Gives token of a goodly day to morrow.
Sir William Brandon, you shall bear my Standard:
Give me some Ink and Paper in my Tent:
I Will draw the Form and Model of our Battle,
Limit each Leader to his several Charge,
And part in just proportion our small Power.
My Lord of Oxford, you Sir William Brandon,
And your Sir Walter Herbert stay with me:
The Earl of Pembroke keeps his Regiment;
Good Captain Blunt, bear my goodnight to him.
And by the second hour in the Morning,
Desire the Earl to see me in my Tent:
Yet one thing more (good Captain) do for me:
Where is Lord Stanley quartered, do you know?

Unless I have mistane his Colors much,
(Which well I am assured I have not done)
His Regiment lies half a Mile at least
South, from the mighty Power of the King.

If without peril it be possible,
Sweet Blunt, make some good means to speak with him
And give him from me, this most needful Note.

Upon my life, my Lord, I Will undertake it,
And so God give you quiet rest to night.

Good night good Captain Blunt:
Come Gentlemen,
Let us consult upon to morrowes Business;
Into my Tent, the Dew is raw and cold.

What is it a Clock?


It Is Supper time my Lord, it is nine a clock.


I will not sup to night,
Give me some Ink and Paper:
What, is my Beauer easier then it was?
And all my Armor laid into my Tent?

It is my Liege: and all things are in readiness.


Good Norfolk, hye thee to thy charge,
Use careful Watch, choose trusty Sentinels,

I go my Lord.

S^ir with the Lark to morrow, gentle Norfolk.


I warrant you my Lord.


Ratcliffe.


My Lord.


Send out a Pursuiuant at Arms
To Stanleys Regiment: bid him bring his power
Before Sunrising, least his Son George fall
Into the blind Cave of eternal night.
Fill me a Bowl of Wine: Give me a Watch,
Saddle white Surrey for the Field to morrow:
Look that my Staves be sound, and not too heavy.

My Lord.


Saw the melancholy Lord Northumberland?


Thomas the Earl of Surrey, and himself,
Much about Cockshut time, from Troop to Troop
Went through the Army, chearing up the Soldiers.

So, I am satisfied: Give me a Bowl of Wine,
I have not that Alacrity of Spirit,
Nor cheer of Mind that I was wont to have.
Set it down. Is Ink and Paper ready?

It is my Lord.


Bid my Guard watch. Leave me.
Ratcliffe, about the mid of night come to my Tent
And help to arm me. Leave me I say.

Fortune, and Victory sit on thy Helm.


All comfort that the dark night can afford,
Be to thy Person, Noble Father in Law.
Tell me, how fares our Noble Mother?

I by Attorney, bless thee from thy Mother,
Who prays continually for Richmonds good:
So much for that. The silent hours steal on,
And flakie darkness breaks within the East.
In brief, for so the season bids us be,
Prepare thy Battle early in the Morning,
And put thy Fortune to the Arbitrament
Of bloody strokes, and mortal staring War:
I, as I may, that which I would I cannot,
With best advantage will deceive the time,
And aid thee in this doubtful shocke of Arms.
But on thy side I may not be too forward,
Least being seen, thy Brother, tender George
Be executed in his Fathers sight.
Farewell: the leisure, and the fearful time
Cuts off the ceremonious Vows of Love,
And ample enterchange of sweet Discourse,
Which so long sundred Friends should dwell upon:
God give us leisure for these rites of Love.
Once more Adieu, be valiant, and speed well.

Good Lords conduct him to his Regiment:
I Will strive with troubled noise, to take a Nap,
Lest leaden slumber peize me down to morrow,
When I should mount with wings of Victory:
Once more, good night kind Lords and Gentlemen.
O thou, whose Captain I account my self,
Look on my Forces with a gracious eye:
Put in their hands thy bruising Irons of wrath,
That they may crush down with a heavy fall,
The usurping Helmets of our Adversaries:
Make us thy ministers of Chasticement,
That we may praise thee in thy victory:
To thee I do commend my watchful soul,
Ere I let fall the windows of mine eves:
Sleeping, and waking, oh defend me still.

Let me sit heavy on thy soul to morrow:
Think how thou stab'st me in my prime of youth
At Teukesbury: Despair therefore, and dye.

Be cheerful Richmond,
For the wronged Souls
Of butchered Princes, fight in thy behalf:
King Henry's issue Richmond comforts thee.

When I was mortal, my Anointed body
By thee was punched full of holes;
Think on the Tower, and me: Despair, and dye,
Harry the sixth, bids thee despair, and dye.

Virtuous and holy be thou Conqueror:
Harry that prophesied thou should be King,
Does comfort thee in sleep: Live, and flourish.

Let me sit heavy in thy soul to morrow.
I that was washed to death with Fulsome Wine:
Poor Clarence by thy gu^le betrayed to death:
To morrow in the battle think on me,
And fall thy edgelesse Sword, despair and dye.

Thou offspring of the house of Lancaster
The wronged heirs of York do pray for thee,
Good Angels guard thy battle, Live and Flourish.

Let me sit heavy in thy soul to morrow,
Rivers, that died at Pomfret: despair, and dye.

Think upon Gray, and let thy soul despair.


Think upon Vaughan, and with guilty fear
Let fall thy Lance, despair and dye.

Awake,
And think our wrongs in Richards Bosom,
Will conquer him. Awake, and win the day.

Bloody and guilty: guiltily awake,
And in a bloody Battle end thy days.
Think on Lord Hastings: despair, and dye.

Quiet untroubled soul,
Awake, awake:
Arm, fight, and conquer, for fair Englands sake.

Dream on thy Cousins
Smothered in the Tower:
Let us be laid within thy bosom Richard,
And weigh thee down to ruin, shame, and death,
Thy Nephews soul bids thee despair and dye.

Sleep Richmond,
Sleep in Peace, and wake in Joy,
Good Angels guard thee from the Boares annoy,
Live, and be get a happy race of Kings,
Edwards unhappy Sons, do bid thee flourish.

Richard, thy Wife,
That wretched Anne thy Wife,
That never slept a quiet hour with thee,
Now filles thy sleep with perturbations,
To morrow in the Battle, think on me,
And fall thy edgelesse Sword, despair and dye.

Thou quiet soul,
Sleep thou a quiet sleep:
Dream of Success, and Happy Victory,
Thy Adversaries Wife does pray for thee.

The first was I
That helped thee to the Crown:
The last was I that felt thy Tyranny.
O, in the Battle think on Buckingham,
And dye in terror of thy guiltiness.
Dream on, dream on, of bloody deeds and death,
Fainting despair; dispairing yield thy breath.

I dyed for hope
Ere I could lend thee Aid;
But cheer thy heart, and be thou not dismayde:
God, and good Angels fight on Richmonds side,
And Richard fall in height of all his pride.

Give me another Horse, bind up my Wounds:
Have mercy Jesus. Soft, I did but dream.
O coward Conscience! how do thou afflict me?
The Lights burn blew. It is not dead midnight.
Cold fearful drops stand on my trembling flesh.
What? do I fear my Self? There Is none else by,
Richard loves Richard, that is I am I.
Is there a Murderer here? No; Yes, I am:
Then fly; What from my Self? Great reason: why?
Lest I Revenge. What? my Self upon my Self?
Alack, I love my Self. Wherefore? For any good
That I my Self, have done unto my Self?
O no. Alas, I rather hate my Self,
For hateful Deeds committed by my Self.
I am a Villain: yet I Lie, I am not.
Fool, of thy Self speak well: Fool, do not flatter.
My Conscience has a thousand several Tongues,
And every Tongue brings in a several Tale,
And every Tale condemns me for a Villain;
Perjury, in the highest Degree,
Murder, stern murder, in the dyr'st degree,
All several sins, all us d in each degree,
Throng all to 'th Bar, crying all, Guilty, Guilty.
I shall despair, there is no Creature loves me;
And if I die, no soul shall pity me.
Nay, wherefore should they? Since that I my Self,
Find in my Self, no pity to my Self.
Me thought, the Souls of all that I had murdered
Came to my Tent, and every one did threat
To morrowes vengeance on the head of Richard.

My Lord.


Who Is there?


Ratcliffe my Lord, it is I: the early Village Cock
Has twice done salutation to the Morn,
Your Friends are up, and buckle on their Armor.

O Ratcliffe, I fear, I fear.


Nay good my Lord, be not afraid of Shadows.


By the Apostle Paul, shadows to night
Have stroke more terror to the soul of Richard,
Then can the substance of ten thousand Soldiers
Armed in proof, and led by shallow Richmond*
It Is not yet near day. Come go with me,
Under our Tents I Will play the Ease-dropper,
To hear if any mean to shrink from me.

Good morrow Richmond.


Cry mercy Lords* and watchful Gentlemen,
That you have taken a tardie sluggard here?

How have you slept my Lord?


The sweetest sleep,
And fairest boading Dreams,
That ever entered in a drowsy head,
Have I since your departure had my Lords.
Me thought their Souls, whose bodies Rich. murdered,
Came to my Tent, and cried on Victory:
I promise you my Heart is very iocond,
In the remembrance of so fair a dream,
How far into the Morning is it Lords?

Upon the stroke of four.


Why then it is time to Arm, and give direction.
More then I have said, loving Countrymen,
The leisure and inforcement of the time
Forbids to dwell upon: yet remember this,
God, and our good cause, fight upon our side,
The Prayers of holy Saints and wronged souls,
Like high reared Bulwarks, stand before our Faces,
( Richard except) those whom we fight against,
Had rather have us win, then him they follow.
For, what is he they follow? Truly Gentlemen,
A bloody Tyrant, and a Homicide:
One raised in blood, and one in blood established;
One that made means to come by what he has,
And slaughtered those that were the means to help him:
A base foul Stone, made precious by the soil
Of Englands Chair, where he is fal^ely set:
One that has ever been Gods Enemy.
Then if you fight against Gods Enemy,
God will in justice ward you as his Soldiers.
If you do swear to put a Tyrant down,
You sleep in peace, the Tyrant being slain:
If you do fight against your Countries Foes,
Your Countries Fat shall pay your pains the hyre.
If you do fight in safeguard of your wives,
Your wives shall welcome home the Conquerors.
If you do free your Children from the Sword,
Your Childrens Children quits it in your Age.
Then in the name of God and all these rights,
Advance your Standards, draw your willing Swords.
For me, the ransom of my bold attempt,
Shall be this cold Corpse on the earth's cold face.
But if I thrive, the gain of my attempt,
The least of you shall share his part thereof.
Sound Drums and Trumpets boldly, and cheerfully,
God, and Saint George, Richmond, and Victory.

What said Northumberland as touching Richmond?


That he was never trained up in Arms.


He said the truth: and what said Surrey then?


He smiled and said, the be^ter for our purpose.


He was in the right, and so indeed it is.
Tell the clock there.
Give me a Calendar: Who saw the Sun to day?

Not I my Lord.


Then he disdaines to shine: for by the Book
He should have brau'd the East an hour ago,
A black day will it be to somebody. Ratcliffe.

My Lord.


The Sun will not be seen to day,
The sky does frown, and lowre upon our Army.
I would these dewy tears were from the ground.
Not shine to day? Why, what is that to me
More then to Richmond? For the selfsame Heaven
That frowns on me, looks sadly upon him.

Arm, arm, my Lord: the foe vaunts in the field.


Come, bustle, bustle. Caparison my horse.
Call up Lord Stanley, bid him bring his power,
I will lead forth my Soldiers to the plain,
And thus my Battle shall be ordered.
My Foreward shall be drawn in length,
Consisting equally of Horse and Foot:
Our Archers shall be placed in the midst;
John Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Earl of Surrey,
Shall have the leading of the Foot and Horse.
They thus directed, we will fllow
In the maine Battle, whose puissance on either side
Shall be well-winged with our cheifest Horse:
This, and Saint George to boot.
What think thou Norfolk.

A good direction warlike Sovereign,
This found I on my Tent this Morning.
Iockey of Norfolk, be not so bold,
For Dickon thy master is bought and sold.

A thing devised by the Enemy.
Go Gentlemen, every man to his Charge,
Let not our babbling Dreams affright our souls:
For Conscience is a word that Cowards use,
Devised at first to keep the strong in awe,
Our strong arms be our Conscience, Swords our Law.
March on, join bravely, let us to it pell mell,
If not to heaven, then hand in hand to Hell.
What shall I say more then I have inferred?
Remember whom you are to cope withal,
A sort of Vagabonds, Rascals, and Run-awayes,
A scum of Britains, and base Lackey Pezants,
Whom their o're-cloyed Country vomits forth
To desperate Adventures, and assured Destruction.
You sleeping safe, they bring you to unrest:
You having Lands, and blessed with beauteous wives,
They would restrain the one, distaine the other,
And who does lead them, but a pa^try Fellow?
Long kept in Britain at our Mothers cost,
A Milke-sop, one that never in his life
Felt so much cold, as over shoes in Snow:
Let Us whip these straglers over the Seas again,
Lash hence these ouer-weening Rags of France,
These famished Beggars, weary of their lives,
Who (but for dreaming on this fond exploit)
For want of means (poor Rats) had hanged themselves.
If we be conquered, let men conquer us,
And not these bastard Britains, whom our Fathers
Have in their own Land beaten, bobb'd, and thump'd,
And on Record, left them the heirs of shame.
Shall these enjoy our Lands? lie with our Wives?
Ravish our daughters?
Hark, I hear their Drum,
Right Gentlemen of England, fight boldly yeomen,
Draw Archers draw your Arrows to the head,
Spur your proud Horses hard, and ^ide in blood,
Amaze the welkin with your broken staves.
What says Lord Stanley, will he bring his power?

My Lord, he does deny to come.


Off with his son Georges head.


My Lord, the Enemy is past the Mars^:
After the battle, let George Stanley dye.

A thousand hearts are great within my bosom.
Advance our Standards, set upon our Foes,
Our Ancient word of Courage, fair S. George
Inspire us with the spleen of fiery Dragons:
Upon them, Victory sits on our helps.

Rescue my Lord of Norfolk,
Rescue, Rescue:
The King enacts more wonders then a man,
Daring an opposite to every danger:
His horse is slain, and all on foot he fights,
Seeking for Richmond in the throat of death:
Rescue fair Lord, or else the day is lost.

A Horse, a Horse, my Kingdom for a Horse.


Withdraw my Lord, I Will help you to a Horse


Slave, I have set my life upon a cast,
And I will stand the hazard of the Dye:
I think there be six Richmonds in the field,
Five have I slain to day, in stead of him.
A Horse, a Horse, my Kingdom for a Horse.

God, and your Arms
Be praised Victorious Friends;
The day is ours, the bloody Dog is dead.

Courageous Richmond,
Well have thou acquit thee: Lo,
Here these long usurped Royalties,
From the dead Temples of this bloody Wretch,
Have I plucked off, to grace thy Brows withal.
Wear it, and make much of it.

Great God of Heaven, say Amen to all.
But tell me, is young George Stanley living?

He is my Lord, and safe in Leicester Town,
Whither (if you please) we may withdraw us.

What men of name are slain on either side?


John Duke of Norfolk, Walter Lord Ferris, Sir Robert Brokenbury, and Sir
William Brandon


Interre their Bodies, as become their Births,
Proclaim a pardon to the Soldiers fled,
That in submission will return to us,
And then as we have taken the Sacrament,
We will unite the White Rose, and the Red.
Smile Heaven upon this fair Conjunction,
That long have frowned upon their Enmity:
What Traitor hears me, and says not Amen?
England has long been mad, and scarr'd her self;
The Brother blindely shed the Brothers blood;
The Father, rashly slaughtered his own Son;
The Son compelled, been Butcher to the Sire;
All this divided York and Lancaster,
Divided, in their dire Division.
O now, let Richmond and Elizabeth,
The true Succeeders of each Royal House,
By Gods fair ordinance, conioyne together:
And let thy Heirs (God if thy will be so)
Enrich the time to come, with Smooth-faced Peace,
With smiling Plenty, and fair Prosperous days.
Abate the edge of Traitors, Gracious Lord,
That would reduce these bloody days again,
And make poor England weep in Streams of Blood;
Let them not live to taste this Lands increase,
That would with Treason, wound this fair Lands peace.
Now Civil wounds are stopped, Peace lives again;
That she may long live here, God say, Amen.


