HVng be ye heavens with black, yield day to night;
Comets importing change of Times and States,
Brandish your crystal Tresses in the Sky,
And with them scourge the bad reuolting Stars,
That have consented unto Henry's death:
King Henry the Fifth, too famous to live long,
England never lost a King of so much worth.

England never had a King until his time:
Virtue he had, deserving to command,
His brandisht Sword did blind men with his beams,
His Arms spread wider then a Dragons Wings:
His sparkling Eyes, repleat with wrathful fire,
More dazzled and drove back his Enemies,
Then midday Sun, fierce bent against their faces.
What should I say? his Deeds exceed all speech:
He never lift up his Hand, but conquered.

We mourn in black, why mourn we not in blood?
Henry is dead, and never shall revive:
Upon a Wooden Coffin we attend;
And Deaths dishonorable Victory,
We with our stately presence glorify,
Like Captives bound to a Triumphant Carre.
What? shall we curse the Planets of Mishap,
That plotted thus our Glories overthrow?
Or shall we think the subtile-witted French,
Coniurers and Sorcerers, that afraid of him,
By Magic Verses have contrived his end.

He was a King, blessed of the King of Kings.
Unto the French, the dreadful Iudgement-Day
So dreadful will not be, as was his sight.
The Battles of the Lord of Hosts he fought:
The Churches Prayers made him so prosperous.

The Church? where is it?
Had not Churchmen prayed,
His thread of Life had not so soon decayed.
None do you like, but an effeminate Prince,
Whom like a Schoole-boy you may ouer-awe.

Gloucester, what ere we like, thou art Protector,
And look to command the Prince and Realm.
Thy Wife is proud, she holds thee in awe,
More then God or Religious Churchmen may.

Name not Religion, for thou love the Flesh,
And never throughout the year to Church thou go,
Except it be to pray against thy foes.

Cease, cease these Iarres, and rest your minds in peace:
Let Us to the Altar: Heralds wayt on us;
In stead of Gold, we will offer up our Arms,
Since Arms avail not, now that Henry's dead,
Posterity await for wretched years,
When at their Mothers moistened eyes, Babes shall suck,
Our I Will be made a Nourish of salt Tears,
And none but Women left to wayle the dead.
Henry the Fifth, thy Ghost I invoke:
Prosper this Realm, keep it from Civil Broils,
Combat with adverse Planets in the Heavens;
A far more glorious Star thy Soul will make,
Then Julius Caesar, bright --

My honorable Lords, health to you all:
Sad tidings bring I to you out of France,
Of loss, of slaughter, and discomfiture:
Guyen, Champaigne, Rheimes, Orleance,
Paris, Guysors, Poictiers, are all quite lost.

What say thou man, before dead Henry's Coarse?
Speak softly, or the loss of those great Towns
Will make him burst his Lead, and rise from death.

Is Paris lost? is Roan yielded up?
If Henry were recalled to life again,
These news would cause him once more yield the Ghost.

How were they lost? what treachery was used?


No treachery, but want of Men and Money.
Amongst the Soldiers this is muttered,
That here you maintain several Factions:
And whilst a Field should be dispatched and fought,
You are disputing of your Generals.
One would have lingering Wars, with little cost;
Another would fly swift, but wants Wings:
A third thinks, without expense at all,
By guilefull fair words, Peace may be obtayn'd.
Awake, awake, English Nobility,
Let not sloth dim your Honors, new begot;
Cropped are the Flower-de-Luces in your Arms
Of Englands Coat, one half is cut away.

Were our Tears wanting to this Funeral,
These Tidings would call forth her flowing Tides.

Me they concern, Regent I am of France:
Give me my steeled Coat, I Will fight for France.
Away with these disgraceful wayling Robes;
Wounds will I lend the French, in stead of Eyes,
To weep their intermissiue Miseries.

Lords view these Letters, full of bad mischance.
France is revolted from the English quite,
Except some petty Towns, of no import.
The Dolphin Charles is crowned King in Rheimes:
The Bastard of Orleance with him is joined:
Reynold, Duke of Aniou, does take his part,
The Duke of Alanson flies to his side.

The Dolphin crowned King? all fly to him?
O whither shall we fly from this reproach?

We will not fly, but to our enemies throats.
Bedford, if thou be slack, I Will fight it out.

Gloucester, why doubtst thou of my forwardness?
An Army have I mustered in my thoughts,
Wherewith already France is ouer-run.

My gracious Lords, to add to your laments,
Wherewith you now bedew King Henry's hearse,
I must inform you of a dismal fight,
Betwixt the stout Lord Talbot, and the French.

What? wherein Talbot overcame, is it so?


O no: wherein Lord Talbot was overthrown:
The circumstance I Will tell you more at large.
The tenth of August last, this dreadful Lord,
Retyring from the Siege of Orleance,
Having full scarce six thousand in his troop,
By three and twenty thousand of the French
Was round encompassed, and set upon:
No leisure had he to enranke his men.
He wanted Pikes to set before his Archers:
In stead whereof, sharp Stakes plucked out of Hedges
They pitched in the ground confusedly,
To keep the Horsemen off, from breaking in.
More then three hours the fight continued:
Where valiant Talbot, above humane thought,
Enacted wonders with his Sword and Lance.
Hundreds he sent to Hell, and none durst stand him:
Here, there, and every where enraged, he slew.
The French exclaym'd, the Devil was in Arms,
All the whole Army stood agaz'd on him.
His Soldiers spying his undaunted Spirit,
A Talbot, a Talbot, cried out amain,
And rusht into the Bowels of the Battle.
Here had the Conquest fully been sealed up,
If Sir John Falstaff had not played the Coward.
He being in the Vauward, placed behind,
With purpose to relieve and follow them,
Cowardly fled, not having struck one stroke.
Hence grew the general wrack and massacre:
Enclosed were they with their Enemies.
A base Wallon, to win the Dolphins grace,
Thrust Talbot with a Spear into the Back,
Whom all France, with their chief assembled strength,
Durst not presume to look once in the face.

Is Talbot slain then? I will slay my self,
For living idly here, in pomp and ease,
Whilst such a worthy Leader, wanting aid,
Unto his dastard foe-men is betrayed.

O no, he lives, but is took Prisoner,
And Lord Scales with him, and Lord Hungerfor^:
Most of the rest slaughtered, or took likewise.

His Ransom there is none but I shall pay.
I Will hale the Dolphin headlong from his Throne,
His Crown shall be the Ransom of my friend:
Four of their Lords I Will change for one of ours.
Farewell my Masters, to my Task will I,
Bonfires in France forthwith I am to make,
To keep our great Saint Georges Feast withal.
Ten thousand Soldiers with me I will take,
Whose bloody deeds shall make all Europe quake.

So you had need, for Orleance is besieged,
The English Army is grown weak and faint:
The Earl of Salisbury craves supply,
And hardly keeps his men from mutiny,
Since they so few, watch such a multitude.

Remember Lords your Oaths to Henry sworn:
Either to quell the Dolphin utterly,
Or bring him in obedience to your yoke.

I do remember it, and here take my leave,
To go about my preparation.

I Will to the Tower with all the have I can,
To view the Artillery and Munition,
And then I will proclayme young Henry King.

To Eltam will I, where the young King is,
Being ordayn'd his special Governor,
And for his safety there I Will best devise.

Each has his Place and Function to attend:
I am left out; for me nothing remains:
But long I will not be Jack out of Office*
The King from Eltam I intend to send.
And sit at chiefest Stern of public Weal.

Mars his true moving, even as in the Heavens,
So in the Earth, to this day is not known.
Late did he shine upon the English side:
Now we are Victors, upon us he smiles.
What Towns of any moment, but we have?
At pleasure here we lie, near Orleance:
Otherwhiles, the famisht English, like pale Ghosts,
Faintly besiege us one hour in a month.

They want their Porredge, and their fat Bull Beeues:
Either they must be dyeted like Mules,
And have their Prouender tied to their mouths,
Or pitteous they will look, like drowned Mice.

Let Us raise the Siege: why live we idly here?
Talbot is taken, whom we wont to fear:
Remains none but mad-brayn'd Salisbury,
And he may well in fretting spend his gall,
Nor men nor Money has he to make War.

Sound, sound Alarm, we will rush on them.
Now for the honor of the forlorn French:
Him I forgive my death, that kills me,
When he sees me go back one foot, or fly.

Who ever saw the like? what men have I?
Dogs, Cowards, Dastards: I would never have fled,
But that they left me 'midst my Enemies.

Salisbury is a desperate Homicide,
He fights as one weary of his life:
The other Lords, like Lions wanting food,
Do rush upon us as their hungry prey.

Froysard, a Countreyman of ours, records,
England all Oliuers and Rowlands breed,
During the time Edward the third did reign:
More truly now may this be verified;
For none but Samsons and Goliasses
It sends forth to skirmish: one to ten?
Lean raw-bon'd Rascals, who would e're suppose,
They had such courage and audacitie?

Let Us leave this Town,
For they are hayre-brayn'd Slaves,
And hunger will enforce them to be more eager:
Of old I know them; rather with their Teeth
The Walls they will tear down, then forsake the Siege.

I think by some odd Gimmors or Device
Their Arms are set, like Clocks, still to strike on;
Else never could they hold out so as they do:
By my consent, we will even let them alone.

Be it so.


Where Is the Prince Dolphin? I have news for him.


Bastard of Orleance, thrice welcome to us.


Me thinks your looks are sad, your cheer appal'd.
Has the late overthrow wrought this offense?
Be not dismayed, for succor is at hand:
A holy Maid hither with me I bring,
Which by a Vision sent to her from Heaven,
Ordained is to raise this tedious Siege,
And drive the English forth the bounds of France:
The spirit of deep Prophecy she has,
Exceeding the nine Sibyls of old Rome:
What Is past, and what is to come, she can descry.
Speak, shall I call her in? believe my words,
For they are certain, and infallible

Go call her in: but first, to try her skill,
Reignier stand thou as Dolphin in my place;
Question her prowdly, let thy Looks be stern,
By this means shall we found what skill she has.

Fair Maid, is it thou will do these wondrous feats?


Reignier, is it thou that think to beguile me?
Where is the Dolphin? Come, come from behind,
I know thee well, though never seen before.
Be not amazed, there is nothing hid from me;
In private will I talk with thee apart:
Stand back you Lords, and give us leave a while.

She takes upon her bravely at first dash.


Dolphin, I am by birth a Shepherds Daughter,
My wit vntrayn'd in any kind of Art:
Heaven and our Lady gracious has it pleased
To shine on my contemptible estate.
Lo, whilst I waited on my tender Lambs,
And to Suns parching heat displayed my cheeks,
Gods Mother deigned to appear to me,
And in a Vision full of Majesty,
Willed me to leave my base Vocation,
And free my Country from Calamity:
Her aid she promised, and assured success.
In complete Glory she revealed her self:
And whereas I was black and swart before,
With those clear Rays, which she infused on me,
That beauty am I blessed with, which you may see.
Ask me what question thou can possible,
And I will answer vnpremeditated:
My Courage try by Combat, if thou dare,
And thou shall find that I exceed my Sex.
Resolve on this, thou shall be fortunate,
If thou receive me for thy Warlike Mate.

Thou have astonished me with thy high terms:
Only this proof I Will of thy Valor make,
In single Combat thou shall buckle with me;
And if thou vanquishest, thy words are true,
Otherwise I renounce all confidence.

I am prepared: here is my keene-edg'd Sword,
Decked with fine Flower-de-Luces on each side,
The which at Touraine, in S. Katherines Churchyard,
Out of a great deal of old Iron, I chose forth.

Then come a Gods name, I fear no woman.


And while I live, I Will never fly from a man.


Stay, stay thy hands, thou art an Amazon,
And fightest with the Sword of Debora.

Christ's Mother helps me, else I were too weak.


Who e're helps thee, it is thou that must help me:
Impatiently I burn with thy desire,
My heart and hands thou have at once subdued.
Excellent Puzel, if thy name be so,
Let me thy servant, and not Sovereign be,
It Is the French Dolphin sueth to thee thus.

I must not yield to any rights of Love,
For my Profession's sacred from above:
When I have chased all thy Foes from hence,
Then will I think upon a recompense.

Mean time look gracious on thy prostrate Thrall.


My Lord me thinks is very long in talk.


Doubtless he shriues this woman to her smock,
Else never could he so long protract his speech.

Shall we disturb him, since he keeps no mean?


He may mean more then we poor men do know,
These women are shrewd tempters with their tongues.

My Lord, where are you? what devise you on?
Shall we give over Orleance, or no?

Why no, I say: distrustful Recreants,
Fight till the last gasp: I Will be your guard.

What she says, I Will confirm: we will fight it out.


Assigned am I to be the English Scourge.
This night the Siege assuredly I Will raise:
Expect Saint Martins Summer, Halcyons days,
Since I have entered into these Wars.
Glory is like a Circle in the Water,
Which never cease to enlarge it self,
Till by broad spreading, it disperse to naught.
With Henry's death, the English Circle ends,
Dispersed are the glories it included:
Now am I like that proud insulting Ship,
Which Caesar and his fortune bare at once.

Was Mahomet inspired with a Dove?
Thou with an Eagle art inspired then.
Helen, the Mother of Great Constantine,
Nor yet S. Philips daughters were like thee.
Bright Star of Venus, fallen down on the Earth,
How may I reverently worship thee enough?

Leave off delays, and let us raise the Siege.


Woman, do what thou can to save our honors,
Drive them from Orleance, and be immortalized.

Presently we will try: come, let us away about it,
No Prophet will I trust, if she prove false.

I am come to survey the Tower this day;
Since Henry's death, I fear there is Conueyance:
Where be these Warders, that they wait not here?
Open the Gates, it is Gloucester that calls.

Who Is there, that knocks so imperiously?


It is the Noble Duke of Gloucester.


Who ere he be, you may not be let in.


Villains, answer you so the Lord Protector?


The Lord protect him, so we answer him,
We do no otherwise then we are willed.

Who willed you? or whose will stands but mine?
There Is none Protector of the Realm, but I:
Break up the Gates, I Will be your warrantize;
Shall I be flowted thus by dunghill Grooms?

What noise is this? what Traitors have we here?


Lieutenant, is it you whose voice I hear?
Open the Gates, here is Gloucester that would enter.

Have patience Noble Duke, I may not open,
The Cardinal of Winchester forbids:
From him I have express commandment,
That thou nor none of thine shall be let in.

Faint-hearted Wooduile, prizest him before me?
Arrogant Winchester, that haughty Prelate,
Whom Henry our late Sovereign never could brook?
Thou art no friend to God, or to the King:
Open the Gates, or I Will shut thee out shortly.

Open the Gates unto the Lord Protector,
Or we will burst them open, if that you come not quickly.

How now ambitious Vmpheir, what means this?


Piel'd Priest, doo'st thou command me to be shut out?


I do, thou most usurping Proditor,
And not Protector of the King or Realm.

Stand back thou manifest Conspirator,
Thou that contriued'st to murder our dead Lord,
Thou that give Whores Indulgences to sin,
I Will canuas thee in thy broad Cardinals Hat,
If thou proceed in this thy insolence.

Nay, stand thou back, I will not budge a foot:
This be Damascus, be thou cursed Cain,
To slay thy Brother Abel, if thou will.

I will not slay thee, but I Will drive thee back:
Thy Scarlet Robes, as a Child's bearing Cloth,
I Will use, to carry thee out of this place.

Do what thou dare, I beard thee to thy face.


What? am I dared, and bearded to my face?
Draw men, for all this privileged place,
Blew Coats to Tawny Coats, Priest, beware your Beard,
I mean to tugge it, and to cuffe you soundly.
Under my feet I stamp thy Cardinals Hat:
In spite of Pope, or dignities of Church,
Here by the Cheeks I Will drag thee up and down.

Gloucester, thou will answer this before the Pope.


Winchester Goose, I cry, a Rope, a Rope.
Now beat them hence, why do you let them stay?
Thee I Will chase hence, thou Wolf in Sheep array.
Out Tawney-Coates, out Scarlet Hypocrite.

Fie Lords, that you being supreme. Magistrates,
Thus contumeliously should break the Peace.

Peace Mayor, thou know little of my wrongs:
Here Is Beauford, that regards nor God nor King,
Has here distrayn'd the Tower to his use.

Here Is Gloucester, a Foe to Citizens,
One that still motions War, and never Peace,
O're-charging your free Purses with large Fines;
That seeks to overthrow Religion,
Because he is Protector of the Realm;
And would have Armor here out of the Tower,
To Crown himself King, and suppress the Prince.

I will not answer thee with words, but blows.


Naught rests for me, in this tumultuous strife,
But to make open Proclamation.
Come Officer, as loud as e're thou can, cry:
All manner of men, assembled here in Arms this day, against Gods Peace and
the Kings, we charge and command you, in his Highness Name, to repair to
your several dwelling places, and not to wear, handle, or use any Sword,
Weapon, or Dagger hence-forward, upon pain of death.
Cardinal, I Will be no breaker of the Law:
But we shall meet, and break our minds at large.

Gloucester, we will meet to thy cost, be sure:
Thy heart-blood I will have for this days work.

I Will call for Clubs, if you will not away:
This Cardinall's more haughty then the Devil.

Mayor farewell: thou doo'st but what thou may.


Abominable Gloucester, guard thy Head,
For I intend to have it ere long.

See the Coast cleared, and then we will depart.
Good God, these Nobles should such stomachs bear,
I my self fight not once in forty year.

Sirrah, thou know how Orleance is besieged,
And how the English have the Suburbs won.

Father I know, and often have shot at them,
How e're unfortunate, I missed my aim.

But now thou shall not. Be thou ruled by me:
Chief Master Gunner am I of this Town,
Something I must do to procure me grace:
The Princes espyals have informed me,
How the English, in the Suburbs close entrencht,
Went through a secret Grate of Iron Bars,
In yonder Tower, to ouer-peere the City,
And thence discover, how with most advantage
They may vex us with Shot or with Assault.
To intercept this inconvenience,
A Piece of Ordnance against it I have placed,
And even these three days have I watched,
If I could see them. Now do thou watch,
For I can stay no longer.
If thou spy'st any, run and bring me word,
And thou shall find me at the Governors.

Father, I warrant you, take you no care,
I Will never trouble you, if I may spy them.

Talbot, my life, my joy, again returned?
How were thou handled, being Prisoner?
Or by what means got's thou to be released?
Discourse I prithee on this Turrets top.

The Earl of Bedford had a Prisoner,
Called the brave Lord Ponton de Sautrayle,
For him was I exchanged, and ransomed.
But with a baser man of Arms by far,
Once in contempt they would have bartered me:
Which I disdaining, scorned, and craved death,
Rather then I would be so pil'd esteemed:
In fine, redeemed I was as I desired.
But O, the treacherous Falstaff wounds my heart,
Whom with my bare fists I would execute,
If I now had him brought into my power.

Yet tell thou not, how thou were entertained.


With scoffs and scorns, and contumelious taunts,
In open Marketplace produced they me,
To be a public spectacle to all:
Here, said they, is the Terror of the French,
The Scar-Crow that affrights our Children so.
Then broke I from the Officers that led me,
And with my nails dug stones out of the ground,
To hurl at the beholders of my shame.
My grisly countenance made others fly,
None durst come near, for fear of sudden death.
In Iron Walls they deemed me not secure:
So great fear of my Name amongst them were spread,
That they supposed I could rend Bars of Steel,
And spurn in pieces Posts of Adamant.
Wherefore a guard of chosen Shot I had,
That walked about me every Minute while:
And if I did but stir out of my Bed,
Ready they were to shoot me to the heart.

I grieve to hear what torments you endured,
But we will be revenged sufficiently.
Now it is Supper time in Orleance:
Here, through this Grate, I count each one,
And view the Frenchmen how they fortify:
Let us look in, the sight will much delight thee:
Sir Thomas Gargraue, and Sir William Glandsdale,
Let me have your express opinions,
Where is best place to make our Batt'ry next?

I think at the North Gate, for there stands Lords.


And (...) here, at the Bulwark of the Bridge.


For ought I see, this City must be famisht,
Or with light Skirmishes enfeebled.

O Lord have mercy on us, wretched sinners.


O Lord have mercy on me, woeful man.


What chance is this, that suddenly has crossed us?
Speak Salisbury; at least, if thou can, speak:
How far'st thou, Mirror of all Martial men?
One of thy Eyes, and thy Cheeks side struck off?
Accursed Tower, accursed fatal Hand,
That has contrived this woeful Tragedy.
In thirteen Battles, Salisbury of recame:
Henry the Fifth he first trayn'd to the Wars.
Whilst any Trumpe did sound, or Drum struck up,
His Sword did never leave striking in the field.
Yet live thou Salisbury? though thy speech does fail,
One Eye thou have to look to Heaven for grace.
The Sun with one Eye vieweth all the World.
Heaven be thou gracious to none alive,
If Salisbury wants mercy at thy hands.
Bear hence his Body, I will help to bury it.
Sir Thomas Gargraue, have thou any life?
Speak unto Talbot, nay, look up to him.
Salisbury cheer thy Spirit with this comfort,
Thou shall not dye whiles --
He beckens with his hand, and smiles on me:
As who should say, When I am dead and gone,
Remember to avenge me on the French.
Plantaginet I will, and like thee,
Play on the Lute, beholding the Towns burn:
Wretched shall France be only in my Name.
What stir is this? what tumult's in the Heavens?
Whence comes this Alarm, and the noise?

My Lord, my Lord, the French have gathered head,
The Dolphin, with one Ioane de Puzel joined,
A holy Prophetess, new risen up,
Is come with a great Power, to raise the Siege.

Hear, hear, how dying Salisbury does groan,
It irke^ his heart he cannot be revenged.
Frenchmen, I Will be a Salisbury to you.
Puzel or Pussel, Dolphin or Dog-fish,
Your hearts I Will stamp out with my Horses heels,
And make a Quagmire of your mingled brains.
Convey me Salisbury into his Tent,
And then we will try what these dastard Frenchmen dare.

Where is my strength, my valor, and my force?
Our English Troops retire, I cannot stay them,
A Woman clad in Armor chaseth them.
Here, here she comes. I Will have a bowt with thee:
Devil, or Devils Dam, I Will conjure thee:
Blood will I draw on thee, thou art a Witch,
And straightway give thy Soul to him thou seru'st.

Come, come, it is only I that must disgrace thee.


Heavens, can you suffer Hell so to prevail?
My breast I Will burst with straining of my courage,
And from my shoulders crack my Arms asunder,
But I will chastise this high-minded Strumpet.

Talbot farewell, thy hour is not yet come,
I must go Victual Orleance forthwith:
O're-take me if thou can, I scorn thy strength.
Go, go, cheer up thy hungry-starued men,
Help Salisbury to make his Testament,
This Day is ours, as many more shall be.

My thoughts are whirled like a Potters Wheel,
I know not where I am, nor what I do:
A Witch by fear, not force, like Hannibal,
Drives back our troops, and conquers as she lists:
So Bees with smoke, and Doves with noisome stench,
Are from their Hyues and Houses driven away.
They called us, for our fierceness, English Dogs,
Now like to Whelps, we crying run away,
Hark Countrymen, either renew the fight,
Or tear the Lions out of Englands Coat;
Renounce your Soil, give Sheep in Lions stead:
Sheep run not half so treacherous from the Wolf,
Or Horse or Oxen from the Leopard,
As you fly from your oft-subdued slaves.
It will not be, retire into your Trenches:
You all consented unto Salisburies death,
For none would strike a stroke in his revenge.
Puzel is entered into Orleance,
In spite of us, or ought that we could do.
O would I were to dye with Salisbury,
The shame hereof, will make me hide my head.

Advance our wauing Colors on the Walls,
Rescued is Orleance from the English.
Thus Ioane de Puzel has performed her word.

Diuinest Creature, Astrea's Daughter,
How shall I honor thee for this success?
Thy promises are like Adonis Garden,
That one day bloomed, and fruitful were the next.
France, triumph in thy glorious Prophetess,
Recouer'd is the Town of Orleance,
More blessed hap did never befall our State.

Why ring not out the Bells alowd,
Throughout the Town?
Dolphin command the Citizens make Bonfires,
And feast and banquet in the open streets,
To celebrate the joy that God has given us.

All France will be repleat with mirth and joy,
When they shall hear how we have played the men.

It Is Ioane, not we, by whom the day is won:
For which, I will divide my Crown with her,
And all the Priests and Friars in my Realm,
Shall in procession sing her endless praise.
A statelyer Pyramid to her I Will rear,
Then Rhodophe's or Memphis ever was.
In memory of her, when she is dead,
Her Ashes, in an Vrne more precious
Then the rich-iewel'd Coffer of Darius,
Transported, shall be at high Festiuals
Before the Kings and Queens of France.
No longer on Saint Dennis will we cry,
But Ioane de Puzel shall be France's Saint.
Come in, and let us Banquet Royally,
After this Golden Day of Victory.

Sirs, take your places, and be vigilant:
If any noise or Soldier you perceive
Near to the walls, by some apparent sign
Let us have knowledge at the Court of Guard.

Sergeant you shall. Thus are poor Seruitors
(When others sleep upon their quiet beds)
Constrained to watch in darkness, rain, and cold.

Lord Regent, and redoubted Burgundy,
By whose approach, the Regions of Artoys,
Wallon, and Picardy, are friends to us:
This happy night, the Frenchmen are secure,
Having all day carows'd and banquetted,
Embrace we then this opportunity,
As fitting best to quittance their deceit,
Contrived by Art, and balefull Sorcerie.

Coward of France, how much he wrongs his fame,
Dispairing of his own arms fortitude,
To join with Witches, and help of Hell.

Traitors have never other company.
But what is that Puzell whom they tear me so pure?

A Maid, they say.


A Maid? And be so martial?


Pray God she prove not masculine ere long:
If underneath the Standard of the French
She carry Armor, as she has begun.

Well, let them practice and converse with spirits.
God is our Fortress, in whose conquering name
Let us resolve to scale their flinty bulwarks.

Ascend brave Talbot, we will follow thee.


Not altogether: Better far I guess,
That we do make our entrance several ways:
That if it chance the one of us do fail,
The other yet may rise against their force.

Agreed; I Will to yond corner.


And I to this.


And here will Talbot mount, or make his grave.
Now Salisbury, for thee and for the right
Of English Henry, shall this night appear
How much in duty. I am bound to both.

Arm, arm, the enemy does make assault.


How now my Lords? What all unready so?


Unready? I and glad we escaped so well.


'Twas time (I trow) to wake and leave our beds,
Hearing Alarums at our Chamber doors.

Of all exploits since first I followed Arms,
Nere heard I of a warlike enterprise
More venturous, or desperate then this.

I think this Talbot be a Fiend of Hell.


If not of Hell, the Heavens sure favor him.


Here comes Charles, I marvel how he sped?


Tut, holy Ioane was his defensive Guard.


Is this thy cunning, thou deceitful Dame?
Did thou at first, to flatter us withal,
Make us partakers of a little gain,
That now our loss might be ten times so much?

Wherefore is Charles impatient with his friend?
At all times will you have my Power alike?
Sleeping or waking, must I still prevail,
Or will you blame and lay the fault on me?
Improuident Soldiers, had your Watch been good,
This sudden Mischief never could have fallen.

Duke of Alanson, this was your default,
That being Captain of the Watch to Night,
Did look no better to that weighty Charge.

Had all your Quarters been as safely kept,
As that whereof I had the government,
We had not been thus shamefully surpised.

Mine was secure.


And so was mine, my Lord.


And for my self, most part of all this Night
Within her Quarter, and mine own Precinct,
I was employed in passing to and fro,
About relieuing of the Sentinels.
Then how, or which way, should they first break in?

Question (my Lords) no further of the case,
How or which way; it is sure they found some place,
But weakly guarded, where the breach was made:
And now there rests no other shift but this,
To gather our Soldiers, scattered and disperc't,
And lay new Plat-formes to endammage them.

I Will be so bold to take what they have left:
The Cry of Talbot serves me for a Sword,
For I have laden me with many Spoils,
Using no other Weapon but his Name.

The Day begins to break, and Night is fled,
Whose pitchy Mantle ouer-vayl'd the Earth.
Here sound Retreat, and cease our hot pursuit.

Bring forth the Body of old Salisbury,
And here advance it in the Marketplace,
The middle Centure of this cursed Town.
Now have I paid my Vow unto his Soul:
For every drop of blood was drawn from him,
There has at least five Frenchmen dyed to night.
And that hereafter Ages may behold
What ruin happened in revenge of him,
Within their chiefest Temple I Will erect
A Tomb, wherein his Corpse shall be interred:
Upon the which* that every one may read,
Shall be engrau'd the sack of Orleance,
The treacherous manner of his mournful death,
And what a terror he had been to France.
But Lords, in all our bloody Massacre,
I muse we met not with the Dolphins Grace,
His new-come Champion, virtuous Ioane of Acre,
Nor any of his false Confederates.

It Is thought Lord Talbot, when the fight began,
Roused on the sudden from their drowsy Beds,
They did amongst the troops of armed men,
Leap over the Walls for refuge in the field.

My self, as far as I could well discern,
For smoke, and duskie vapors of the night,
Am sure I scared the Dolphin and his Trull,
When Arm in Arm they both came swiftly running,
Like to a pair of loving Turtle-Doues,
That could not live asunder day or night.
After that things are set in order here,
We Will follow them with all the power we have.

All hayle, my Lords: which of this Princely train
Call ye the Warlike Talbot, for his Acts
So much applauded through the Realm of France?

Here is the Talbot, who would speak with him?


The virtuous Lady, Countess of Ouergne,
With modesty admiring thy Renown,
By me entreats (great Lord) thou would vouchsafe
To visit her poor Castle where she lies,
That she may boast she has beheld the man,
Whose glory fills the World with loud report.

Is it even so? Nay, then I see our Wars
Will turn unto a peaceful Comic sport,
When Ladies crave to be encountered with.
You may not (my Lord) despise her gentle suit.

Never trust me then: for when a World of men
Could not prevail with all their Oratorie,
Yet has a Woman's kindness ouer-rul'd:
And therefore tell her, I return great thanks,
And in submission will attend on her.
Will not your Honors bear me company?

No, truly, it is more then manners will:
And I have heard it said, Unbidden Guests
Are often welcommest when they are gone.

Well then, alone (since there is no remedy)
I mean to prove this Ladies courtesy.
Come hither Captain, you perceive my mind.

I do my Lord, and mean accordingly.


Porter, remember what I gave in charge,
And when you have done so, bring the Keys to me.

Madame, I will.


The Plot is laid, if all things fall out right,
I shall as famous be by this exploit,
As Scythian Tomyris by Cyrus death.
Great is the rumor of this dreadful Knight,
And his atchieuements of no less account:
Feign would mine eyes be witness with mine ears,
To give their censure of these rare reports.

Madame, according as your Ladyship desired,
By Message craved, so is Lord Talbot come.

And he is welcome: what? is this the man?


Madame, it is.


Is this the Scourge of France?
Is this the Talbot, so much feared abroad?
That with his Name the Mothers still their Babes?
I see Report is fabulous and false.
I thought I should have seen some Hercules,
A second Hector, for his grim aspect,
And large proportion of his strong knit Limbs.
Alas, this is a Child, a silly Dwarf:
It cannot be, this weak and writhled shrimpe
Should strike such terror to his Enemies.

Madame, I have been bold to trouble you:
But since your Ladyship is not at leisure,
I Will sort some other time to visit you.

What means he now?
Go ask him, whither he goes?

Stay my Lord Talbot, for my Lady craves,
To know the cause of your abrupt departure?

Marry, for that she is in a wrong belief,
I go to certify her Talbot's here.

If thou be he, then art thou Prisoner.


Prisoner? to whom?


To me, blood-thirstie Lord:
And for that cause I trayn'd thee to my House.
Long time thy shadow has been thrall to me,
For in my Gallery thy Picture hangs:
But now the substance shall endure the like,
And I will chain these Legs and Arms of thine,
That have by Tyranny these many years
Wasted our Country, slain our Citizens,
And sent our Sons and Husbands captiuate.

Ha, ha, ha.


Laughest thou Wretch?
Thy mirth shall turn to moan.

I laugh to see your Ladyship so fond,
To think, that you have ought but Talbots shadow,
Whereon to practice your severity.

Why? art not thou the man?


I am indeed.


Then have I substance too.


No, no, I am but shadow of my self:
You are deceived, my substance is not here;
For what you see, is but the smallest part,
And least proportion of Humanity:
I tell you Madame, were the whole Frame here,
It is of such a spacious lofty pitch,
Your Roof were not sufficient to contayn't.

This is a Riddling Merchant for the nonce,
He will be here, and yet he is not here:
How can these contrarieties agree?

That will I show you presently.
How say you Madame? are you now persuaded,
That Talbot is but shadow of himself?
These are his substance, sinews, arms, and strength,
With which he yoaketh your rebellious Necks,
Razeth your Cities, and subuerts your Towns,
And in a moment makes them desolate.

Victorious Talbot, pardon my abuse,
I find thou art no less then Fame has bruited,
And more then may be gathered by thy shape.
Let my presumption not provoke thy wrath,
For I am sorry, that with reverence
I did not entertain thee as thou art.

Be not dismayed, fair Lady, nor misconster
The mind of Talbot, as you did mistake
The outward composition of his body.
What you have done, has not offended me:
Nor other satisfaction do I crave,
But only with your patience, that we may
Taste of your Wine, and see what Cates you have,
For Soldiers stomachs always serve them well.

With all my heart, and think me honored,
To feast so great a Warrior in my House.

Great Lords and Gentlemen,
What means this silence?
Dare no man answer in a Case of Truth?

Within the Temple Hall we were too loud,
The Garden here is more convenient.

Then say at once, if I maintained the Truth:
Or else was wrangling Somerset in the error?

Faith I have been a Traunt in the Law,
And never yet could frame my will to it,
And therefore frame the Law unto my will.

Judge you, my Lord of Warwick, then between us.


Between two Hawks, which flies the higher pitch,
Between two Dogs, which has the deeper mouth,
Between two Blades, which bears the better temper,
Between two Horses, which does bear him best,
Between two Girls, which has the merryest eye,
I have perhaps some shallow spirit of Judgment:
But in these nice sharp Quillets of the Law,
Good faith I am no wiser then a Daw.

Tut, tut, here is a mannerly forbearance:
The truth appears so naked on my side,
That any purblind eye may find it out.

And on my side it is so well apparrell'd,
So clear, so shining, and so evident,
That it will glimmer through a blind-mans eye.

Since you are tongue-ty'd, and so loath to speak,
In dumb significants proclayme your thoughts:
Let him that is a true-borne Gentleman,
And stands upon the honor of his birth,
If he suppose that I have pleaded truth,
From off this Bryer pluck a white Rose with me.

Let him that is no Coward, nor no Flatterer,
But dare maintain the party of the truth,
Pluck a red Rose from off this Thorn with me.

I love no Colors: and without all color
Of base insinuating flattery,
I pluck this white Rose with Plantagenet.

I pluck this red Rose, with young Somerset,
And say withal, I think he held the right.

Stay Lords and Gentlemen, and pluck no more
Till you conclude, that he upon whose side
The fewest Roses are cropped from the Tree,
Shall yield the other in the right opinion.

Good Master Vernon, it is well objected:
If I have fewest, I subscribe in silence.

And I.


Then for the truth, and plainness of the Case,
I pluck this pale and Maiden Blossom here,
Giving my Verdict on the white Rose side.

Prick not your finger as you pluck it off,
Least bleeding, you do paint the white Rose red,
And fall on my side so against your will.

If I, my Lord, for my opinion bleed,
Opinion shall be Surgeon to my hurt,
And keep me on the side where still I am.

Well, well, come on, who else?


Unless my Study and my Books be false,
The argument you held, was wrong in you;
In sign whereof, I pluck a white Rose too.

Now Somerset, where is your argument?


Here in my Scabbard, meditating, that
Shall dye your white Rose in a bloody red.

Mean time your cheeks do counterfeit our Roses:
For pale they look with fear, as witnessing
The truth on our side.

No Plantagenet:
It Is not for scare, but anger, that thy cheeks
Blush for pure shame, to counterfeit our Roses,
And yet thy tongue will not confess thy error.

Has not thy Rose a Canker, Somerset?


Has not thy Rose a Thorn, Plantagenet?


I, sharp and piercing to maintain his truth,
Whiles thy consuming Canker eats his falsehood.

Well, I Will find friends to wear my bleeding Roses,
That shall maintain what I have said is true,
Where false Plantagenet dare not be seen.

Now by this Maiden Blossom in my hand,
I scorn thee and thy fashion peevish Boy.

Turn not thy scorns this way, Plantagenet.


Proud Poole, I will, and scorn both him and thee.


I Will turn my part thereof into thy throat.


Away, away, good William de la Poole,
We grace the Yeoman, by conuersing with him.

Now by Gods will thou wrong'st him, Somerset:
His Grandfather was Lyonel Duke of Clarence,
Third Son to the third Edward King of England:
Spring Crestlesse Yeomen from so deep a Root?

He bears him on the place's Privilege,
Or durst not for his crauen heart say thus.

By him that made me, I Will maintain my words
On any Plot of Ground in Christendom.
Was not thy Father Richard, Earl of Cambridge,
For Treason executed in our late Kings days?
And by his Treason, stand'st not thou attainted,
Corrupted, and exempt from ancient Gentry?
His Trespass yet lives guilty in thy blood,
And till thou be restored, thou art a Yeoman.

My Father was attached, not attainted,
Condemned to dye for Treason, but no Traitor;
And that I Will prove on better men then Somerset,
Were growing time once ripened to my will.
For your partaker Poole, and you your self,
I Will note you in my Book of Memory,
To scourge you for this apprehension:
Look to it well, and say you are well warned.

Ah, thou shall find us ready for thee still:
And know us by these Colors for thy Foes,
For these my friends in spite of thee shall wear.

And by my Soul, this pale and angry Rose,
As Cognizance of my blood-drinking hate,
Will I for ever, and my Faction wear,
Until it wither with me to my Grave,
Or flourish to the height of my Degree.

Go forward, and be choked with thy ambition:
And so farewell, until I meet thee next.

Have with thee Poole: Farewell ambitious Richard.


How I am brau'd, and must perforce endure it?


This blot that they object against your House,
Shall be whipped out in the next Parliament,
Called for the Truce of Winchester and Gloucester:
And if thou be not then created York,
I will not live to be accounted Warwick.
Mean time, in signal of my love to thee,
Against proud Somerset, and William Poole,
Will I upon thy party wear this Rose.
And here I prophecy: this brawle to day,
Grown to this faction in the Temple Garden,
Shall send between the Red-Rose and the White,
A thousand Souls to Death and deadly Night.

Good Master Vernon, I am bound to you,
That you on my behalf would pluck a Flower.

In your behalf still will I wear the same.


And so will I.


Thanks gentle.
Come, let us four to Dinner: I dare say,
This Quarrel will drink Blood another day.

Kind Keepers of my weak decaying Age,
Let dying Mortimer here rest himself.
Even like a man new haled from the Wrack,
So fare my Limbs with long Imprisonment:
And these gray Locks, the Pursuiuants of death,
Nestor-like aged, in an Age of Care,
Argue the end of Edmund Mortimer.
These Eyes, like Lamps, whose wasting Oil is spent,
Wax dim, as drawing to their Exigent.
Weak Shoulders, ouer-borne with burthening Grief,
And pyth-lesse Arms, like to a withered Vine,
That droupes his sappe-lesse Branches to the ground.
Yet are these Feet, whose strength-lesse stay is numme,
(Unable to support this Lump of Clay)
Swift-winged with desire to get a Grave,
As witting I no other comfort have.
But tell me, Keeper, will my Nephew come?

Richard Plantagenet, my Lord, will come:
We sent unto the Temple, unto his Chamber,
And answer was returned, that he will come.

Enough: my Soul shall then be satisfied.
Poor Gentleman, his wrong does equal mine.
Since Henry Monmouth first began to reign,
Before whose Glory I was great in Arms,
This loathsome sequestration have I had;
And even since then, has Richard been obscured,
Deprived of Honor and Inheritance.
But now, the Arbitrator of Despaires,
Just Death, kind Vmpire of men's miseries,
With sweet enlargement does dismiss me hence:
I would his troubles likewise were expired,
That so he might recover what was lost.

My Lord, your loving Nephew now is come.


Richard Plantagenet, my friend, is he come?


I, Noble Uncle, thus ignobly used,
Your Nephew, late despised Richard, comes.

Direct mine Arms, I may embrace his Neck,
And in his Bosom spend my latter gasp.
Oh tell me when my Lips do touch his Cheeks,
That I may kindly give one fainting Kiss.
And now declare sweet Stem from Yorkes great Stock,
Why did thou say of late thou were despised?

First, lean thine aged Back against mine Arm,
And in that ease, I Will tell thee my Disease.
This day in argument upon a Case,
Some words there grew 'twixt Somerset and me:
Among which terms, he used his lavish tongue,
And did upbraid me with my Fathers death;
Which obloquie set bars before my tongue,
Else with the like I had requited him.
Therefore good Uncle, for my Fathers sake,
In honor of a true Plantagenet,
And for Alliance sake, declare the cause
My Father, Earl of Cambridge, lost his Head.

That cause (fair Nephew) that imprisoned me,
And has detayn'd me all my flowring Youth,
Within a loathsome Dungeon, there to pyne,
Was cursed Instrument of his decease.

Discover more at large what cause that was,
For I am ignorant, and cannot guess.

I will, if that my fading breath permit,
And Death approach not, ere my Tale be done.
Henry the Fourth, Grandfather to this King,
Deposed his Nephew Richard, Edwards Son,
The first begotten, and the lawful Heir
Of Edward King, the Third of that Descent.
During whose Reign, the Percies of the North,
Finding his Usurpation most unjust,
Endeuour'd my advancement to the Throne.
The reason moved these Warlike Lords to this,
Was, for that (young Richard thus removed,
Leaving no Heir begotten of his Body)
I was the next by Birth and Parentage:
For by my Mother, I derived am
From Lionel Duke of Clarence, third Son
To King Edward the Third; whereas he,
From John of Gaunt does bring his Pedigree,
Being but fourth of that Heroic Line.
But mark: as in this haughty great attempt,
They labored, to plant the rightful Heir,
I lost my Liberty, and they their Lives.
Long after this, when Henry the Fifth
(Succeeding his Father Bullingbrooke) did reign:
Thy Father, Earl of Cambridge, then derived
From famous Edmund Langley, Duke of York,
Marrying my Sister, that thy Mother was;
Again, in pity of my hard distress,
Levied an Army, weening to redeem,
And have installed me in the Diadem:
But as the rest, so fell that Noble Earl,
And was beheaded. Thus the Mortimers,
In whom the Title rested, were suppressed.

Of which, my Lord, your Honor is the last.


True; and thou see, that I no Issue have,
And that my fainting words do warrant death:
Thou art my Heir; the rest, I wish thee gather:
But yet be wary in thy studious care.

Thy grave admonishments prevail with me:
But yet me thinks, my Fathers execution
Was nothing less then bloody Tyranny.

With silence, Nephew, be thou pollitick,
Strong fixed is the House of Lancaster,
And like a Mountain, not to be removed.
But now thy Uncle is removing hence,
As Princes do their Courts, when they are cloyed
With long continuance in a settled place.

O Uncle, would some part of my young years
Might but redeem the passage of your Age.

Thou do then wrong me, as yt slaughterer does,
Which gives many Wounds, when one will kill.
Mourn not, except thou sorrow for my good,
Only give order for my Funeral.
And so farewell, and fair be all thy hopes,
And prosperous be thy Life in Peace and War.

And Peace, no War, befall thy parting Soul.
In Prison have thou spent a Pilgrimage,
And like a Hermit ouer-past thy days.
Well, I will lock his Council in my Breast,
And what I do imagine, let that rest.
Keepers convey him hence, and I my self
Will see his Buryall better then his Life.
Here dies the duskie Torch of Mortimer,
Choakt with Ambition of the meaner sort.
And for those Wrongs, those bitter Injuries,
Which Somerset has offered to my House,
I doubt not, but with Honor to redress.
And therefore haste I to the Parliament,
Either to be restored to my Blood,
Or make my will the advantage of my good.

Come thou with deep premeditated Lines?
With written Pamphlets, studiously devised?
Humfrey of Gloucester, if thou can accuse,
Or ought intend'st to lay unto my charge,
Do it without invention, suddenly,
As I with sudden, and extemporall speech,
Purpose to answer what thou can object.

Presumptuous Priest, this place commands my patience,
Or thou should find thou have dis-honor'd me.
Think not, although in Writing I preferred
The manner of thy vile outrageous Crimes,
That therefore I have forged, or am not able
Verbatim to rehearse the Method of my Pen.
No Prelate, such is thy audacious wickedness,
Thy lewd, pestiserous, and dissentious prancks,
As very Infants prattle of thy pride.
Thou art a most pernicious Usurer,
Froward by nature, Enemy to Peace,
Lascivious, wanton, more then well beseemes
A man of thy Profession, and Degree.
And for thy Treachery, what is more manifest?
In that thou layd'st a Trap to take my Life,
As well at London Bridge, as at the Tower.
Beside, I fear me, if thy thoughts were sifted,
The King, thy Sovereign, is not quite exempt
From envious malice of thy swelling heart.

Gloucester, I do defy thee. Lords vouchsafe
To give me hearing what I shall reply.
If I were covetous, ambitious, or perverse,
As he will have me: how am I so poor?
Or how haps it, I seek not to advance
Or raise my self? but keep my wonted Calling.
And for Dissension, who prefers Peace
More then I do? except I be prouok'd.
No, my good Lords, it is not that offends,
It is not that, that has incensed the Duke:
It is because no one should sway but he,
No one, but he, should be about the King;
And that engenders Thunder in his breast,
And makes him rore these Accusations forth.
But he shall know I am as good.

As good?
Thou Bastard of my Grandfather.

I, Lordly Sir: for what are you, I pray,
But one imperious in another Throne?

Am I not Protector, saucy Priest?


And am not I a Prelate of the Church?


Yes, as an Outlaw in a Castle keeps,
And uses it, to patronage his Theft.

Vnreuerent Gloucester.


Thou art reverent,
Touching thy Spiritual Function, not thy Life.

Rome shall remedy this.


Roame thither then.
My Lord, it were your duty to forbear.

I, see the Bishop be not ouer-borne:
Me thinks my Lord should be Religious,
And know the Office that belongs to such.

Me thinks his Lordship should be humbler,
It fitteth not a Prelate so to plead.

Yes, when his holy State is touched so near.


State holy, or vnhallow'd, what of that?
Is not his Grace Protector to the King?

Plantagenet I see must hold his tongue,
Least it be said, Speak Sirrah when you should:
Must your bold Verdict enter talk with Lords?
Else would I have a fling at Winchester.

Uncles of Gloucester, and of Winchester,
The special Watchmen of our English Weal,
I would prevail, if Prayers might prevail,
To join your hearts in love and amity,
Oh, what a Scandal is it to our Crown,
That two such Noble Peers as ye should jar?
Believe me, Lords, my tender years can tell,
Civil dissension is a viperous Worm,
That gnawes the Bowels of the Commonwealth.

What tumult's this?


An Uproar, I dare warrant,
Begun through malice of the Bishops men.

Oh my good Lords, and virtuous Henry,
Pity the City of London, pity us:
The Bishop, and the Duke of Glosters men,
Forbidden late to carry any Weapon,
Have filled their Pockets full of peeble stones;
And banding themselves in contrary parts,
Do pelt so fast at one another Pate,
That many have their giddy brains knocked out:
Our Windows are broke down in every Street,
And we, for fear, compelled to shut our Shops.

We charge you, on allegiance to our self,
To hold your slaughtring hands, and keep the Peace:
Pray' Uncle Gloucester mittigate this strife.

Nay, if we be forbidden Stones, we will fall to it with our Teeth.


Do what ye dare, we are as resolute.


You of my household, leave this peevish broyle,
And set this vnaccustom'd fight aside.

My Lord, we know your Grace to be a man
Just, and upright; and for your Royal Birth,
Inferior to none, but to his Majesty:
And ere that we will suffer such a Prince,
So kind a Father of the Commonweal,
To be disgraced by an Inke-horne Mate,
We and our Wives and Children all will fight,
And have our bodies slaughtred by thy foes.

I, and the very parings of our Nails
Shall pitch a Field when we are dead.

Stay, stay, I say:
And if you love me, as you say you do,
Let me persuade you to forbear a while.

Oh, how this discord does afflict my Soul.
Can you, my Lord of Winchester, behold
My sighs and tears, and will not once relent?
Who should be pitiful, if you be not?
Or who should study to prefer a Peace,
If holy Churchmen take delight in broils?

Yield my Lord Protector, yield Winchester,
Except you mean with obstinate repulse
To slay your Sovereign, and destroy the Realm.
You see what Mischief, and what Murder too,
Has been enacted through your enmity:
Then be at peace, except ye thirst for blood.

He shall submit, or I will never yield.


Compassion on the King commands me stoop,
Or I would see his heart out, ere the Priest
Should ever get that privilege of me.

Behold my Lord of Winchester, the Duke
Has banished moodie discontented fury,
As by his smoothed Brows it does appear:
Why look you still so stern, and tragical?

Here Winchester, I offer thee my Hand.


Fie Uncle Beauford, I have heard you preach,
That Malice was a great and grievous sin:
And will not you maintain the thing you teach?
But prove a chief offender in the same.

Sweet King: the Bishop has a kindly gyrd:
For shame my Lord of Winchester relent;
What, shall a Child instruct you what to do?

Well, Duke of Gloucester, I will yield to thee
Love for thy Love, and Hand for Hand I give.

I, but I fear me with a hollow Heart.
See here my Friends and loving Countrymen,
This token serves for a Flagge of Truce,
Betwixt our selves, and all our followers:
So help me God, as I dissemble not.

So help me God, as I intend it not.


Oh loving Uncle, kind Duke of Gloucester,
How joyful am I made by this Contract.
Away my Masters, trouble us no more,
But join in friendship, as your Lords have done.

Content, I Will to the Surgeons.


And so will I.


And I will see what Physic the Tavern affords.


Accept this Scrowle, most gracious Sovereign,
Which in the Right of Richard Plantagenet,
We do exhibit to your Majesty.

Well urged, my Lord of Warwick: for sweet Prince,
And if your Grace mark every circumstance,
You have great reason to do Richard right,
Especially for those occasions
At Eltam Place I told your Majesty.

And those occasions, Uncle, were of force:
Therefore my loving Lords, our pleasure is,
That Richard be restored to his Blood.

Let Richard be restored to his Blood,
So shall his Fathers wrongs be recompenc't.

As will the rest, so wills Winchester.


If Richard will be true, not that all alone,
But all the whole Inheritance I give,
That does belong unto the House of York,
From whence you spring, by Lineall Descent.

Thy humble servant vows obedience,
And humble service, till the point of death.

Stoop then, and set your Knee against my Foot,
And in reguerdon of that duty done,
I gyrt thee with the valiant Sword of York:
Rise Richard, like a true Plantagenet,
And rise created Princely Duke of York.

And so thrive Richard, as thy foes may fall,
And as my duty springs, so perish they,
That grudge one thought against your Majesty.

Welcome high Prince, the mighty Duke of York.


Perish base Prince, ignoble Duke of York.


Now will it best avail your Majesty,
To cross the Seas, and to be Crowned in France:
The presence of a King engenders love
Amongst his Subjects, and his loyal Friends,
As it dis-animates his Enemies.

When Gloucester says the word, King Henry goes,
For friendly counsel cuts off many Foes.

Your Ships already are in readiness.


I, we may march in England, or, in France,
Not seeing what is likely to ensue:
This late dissension grown betwixt the Peers,
Burns under fained ashes of forged love,
And will at last break out into a flame,
As festred members rot but by degree,
Till bones and flesh and sinews fall away,
So will this base and envious discord breed.
And now I fear that fatal Prophecy,
Which in the time of Henry, named the Fifth,
Was in the mouth of every sucking Babe,
That Henry borne at Monmouth should win all,
And Henry borne at Windsor, loose all:
Which is so plain, that Exeter does wish,
His days may finish, ere that hapless time.

These are the City Gates, the Gates of Roan,
Through which our Policy must make a breach.
Take heed, be wary how you place your words,
Talk like the vulgar sort of Market men,
That come to gather Money for their Corn.
If we have entrance, as I hope we shall,
And that we find the slothful Watch but weak,
I Will by a sign give notice to our friends,
That Charles the Dolphin may encounter them.

Our Sacks shall be a mean to sack the City
And we be Lords and Rulers over Roan,
Therefore we will knock.

Che la.


Peasauns la pouure gens de France,
Poor Market folks that come to sell their Corn.

Enter, go in, the Market Bell is rung.


Now Roan, I Will shake thy Bulwarks to the ground.


Saint Dennis bless this happy Stratageme,
And once again we will sleep secure in Roan.

Here entered Pucell, and her Practisants:
Now she is there, how will she specify?
Here is the best and safest passage in.

By thrusting out a Torch from yonder Tower,
Which once discerned, shows that her meaning is,
No way to that (for weakness) which she entered.

Behold, this is the happy Wedding Torch,
That joins Roan unto her Countrymen,
But burning fatal to the Talbonites.

See Noble Charles the Beacon of our friend,
The burning Torch in yonder Turret stands.

Now shine it like a Commet of Revenge,
A Prophet to the fall of all our Foes.

Defer no time, delays have dangerous ends,
Enter and cry, the Dolphin, presently,
And then do execution on the Watch.

France, thou shall rue this Treason with thy tears,
If Talbot but survive thy Treachery.
Pucell that Witch, that damned Sorceresse,
Has wrought this Hellish Mischief unawares,
That hardly we escaped the Pride of France.

God morrow Gallants, want ye Corn for Bread?
I think the Duke of Burgonie will fast,
Before he will buy again at such a rate.
'Twas full of Darnell: do you like the taste?

Scoff on vile Fiend, and shameless Curtizan,
I trust ere long to choke thee with thine own,
And make thee curse the Harvest of that Corn.

Your Grace may starve (perhaps) before that time.


Oh let no words, but deeds, revenge this Treason.


What will you do, good gray-beard?
Break a Lance, and run a-Tilt at Death,
Within a Chair.

Foul Fiend of France, and Hag of all despite,
Encompassed with thy lustful Paramours,
Becomes it thee to taunt his valiant Age,
And twit with Cowardice a man half dead?
Damsel, I Will have a bowt with you again,
Or else let Talbot perish with this shame.

Are ye so hot, Sir: yet Pucell hold thy peace,
If Talbot do but Thunder, Rain will follow.
God speed the Parliament: who shall be the Speaker?

Dare ye come forth, and meet us in the field?


Belike your Lordship takes us then for fools,
To try if that our own be ours, or no.

I speak not to that railing Hecate,
But unto thee Alanson, and the rest.
Will ye, like Soldiers, come and fight it out?

Seignior no.


Seignior hang: base Muleters of France,
Like Pesant foot-Boyes do they keep the Walls,
And dare not take up Arms, like Gentlemen.

Away Captains, let us get us from the Walls,
For Talbot means no goodness by his Looks.
God b'uy my Lord, we came but to tell you
That we are here.

And there will we be too, ere it be long,
Or else reproach be Talbots greatest fame.
Vow Burgonie, by honor of thy House,
Pricked on by public Wrongs sustained in France,
Either to get the Town again, or dye.
And I, as sure as English Henry lives,
And as his Father here was Conqueror;
As sure as in this late betrayed Town,
Great Cordelions Heart was buried;
So sure I swear, to get the Town, or dye.

My Vows are equal partners with thy Vows.


But ere we go, regard this dying Prince,
The valiant Duke of Bedford: Come my Lord,
We will bestow you in some better place,
Fitter for sickness, and for crasie age.

Lord Talbot, do not so dishonor me:
Here will I sit, before the Walls of Roan,
And will be partner of your weal or woe.

Courageous Bedford, let us now persuade you.


Not to be gone from hence: for once I read,
That stout Pendragon, in his Litter sick,
Came to the field, and vanquished his foes.
Me thinks I should revive the Soldiers hearts,
Because I ever found them as my self.

Undaunted spirit in a dying breast,
Then be it so: Heavens keep old Bedford safe.
And now no more ado, brave Burgonie,
But gather we our Forces out of hand,
And set upon our boasting Enemy.

Whither away Sir John Falstaff, in such haste?


Whither away? to save my self by flight,
We are like to have the overthrow again.

What? will you fly, and leave Lord Talbot?


I, all the Talbots in the World, to save my life.


Cowardly Knight, ill fortune follow thee.


Now quiet Soul, depart when Heaven please,
For I have seen our Enemies overthrow.
What is the trust or strength of foolish man?
They that of late were daring with their scoffs,
Are glad and feign by flight to save themselves.

Lost, and recovered in a day again,
This is a double Honor, Burgonie:
Yet Heavens have glory for this Victory.

Warlike and Martial Talbot, Burgonie
Inshrines thee in his heart, and there erects
Thy noble Deeds, as Valors Monuments.

Thanks gentle Duke: but where is Pucel now?
I think her old Familiar is asleep.
Now where is the Bastards braues, and Charles his glikes?
What all amort? Roan hangs her head for grief,
That such a valiant Company are fled.
Now will we take some order in the Town,
Placing therein some expert Officers,
And then depart to Paris, to the King,
For there young Henry with his Nobles lie.

What wills Lord Talbot, pleases Burgonie.


But yet before we go, let us not forget
The Noble Duke of Bedford, late deceased,
But see his Exequies fulfilled in Roan.
A brauer Soldier never couched Lance,
A gentler Heart did never sway in Court.
But Kings and mightiest Potentates must die,
For that is the end of humane misery.

Dismay not (Princes) at this accident,
Nor grieve that* Roan is so recovered:
Care is no cure, but rather corrosiue,
For things that are not to be remedied.
Let frantike Talbot triumph for a while,
And like a Peacock sweep along his tail,
We Will pull his Plumes, and take away his Train,
If Dolphin and the rest will be but ruled.

We have been guided by thee hitherto,
And of thy Cunning had no diffidence,
One sudden Foil shall never breed distrust.

Search out thy wit for secret policies,
And we will make thee famous through the World.

We Will set thy Statue in some holy place,
And have thee reuerenc't like a blessed Saint.
Employ thee then, sweet Virgin, for our good.

Then thus it must be, this does Ioane devise:
By fair persuasions, mixed with sugared words,
We will entice the Duke of Burgonie
To leave the Talbot, and to follow us.

I marry Sweeting, if we could do that,
France were no place for Henryes Warriors,
Nor should that Nation boast it so with us,
But be extirped from our Provinces.

For ever should they be expuls'd from France,
And not have Title of an Earldom here.

Your Honors shall perceive how I will work,
To bring this matter to the wished end.
Hark, by the sound of Drum you may perceive
Their Powers are marching unto Paris-ward.
There goes the Talbot with his Colors spread,
And all the Troops of English after him.
Now in the Rereward comes the Duke and his:
Fortune in favor makes him lagge behind.
Summon a Parley, we will talk with him.

A Parley with the Duke of Burgonie.


Who craves a Parley with the Burgonie?


The Princely Charles of France, thy Countryman.


What say thou Charles? for I am marching hence.


Speak Pucell, and enchaunt him with thy words.


Brave Burgonie, undoubted hope of France,
Stay, let thy humble Handmaid speak to thee.

Speak on, but be not ouer-tedious.


Look on thy Country, look on fertile France,
And see the Cities and the Towns defaced,
By wasting Ruin of the cruel Foe,
As looks the Mother on her lowly Babe,
When Death does close his tender-dying Eyes.
See, see the pining Malady of France:
Behold the Wounds, the most unnatural Wounds,
Which thou thy self have given her woeful Breast.
Oh turn thy edged Sword another way,
Strike those that hurt, and hurt not those that help:
One drop of Blood drawn from thy Countries Bosom,
Should grieve thee more then streams of foreign gore.
Return thee therefore with a flood of Tears,
And wash away thy Countries stained Spots.

Either she has bewitched me with her words,
Or Nature makes me suddenly relent.

Besides, all French and France exclaimes on thee,
Doubting thy Birth and lawful Progeny.
Who ioyn'st thou with, but with a Lordly Nation,
That will not trust thee, but for profits sake?
When Talbot has set footing once in France,
And fashioned thee that Instrument of Ill,
Who then, but English Henry, will be Lord,
And thou be thrust out, like a Fugitive?
Call we to mind, and mark but this for proof:
Was not the Duke of Orleance thy Foe?
And was he not in England Prisoner?
But when they heard he was thine Enemy,
They set him free, without his Ransom paid,
In spite of Burgonie and all his friends.
See then, thou fight'st against thy Countrymen,
And ioyn'st with them will be thy slaughter-men.
Come, come, return; return thou wandering Lord,
Charles and the rest will take thee in their arms.

I am vanquished:
These haughty words of hers
Have batt'red me like roaring Cannon-shot,
And made me almost yield upon my knees.
Forgive me Country, and sweet Countrymen:
And Lords accept this hearty kind embrace.
My Forces and my Power of Men are yours.
So farewell Talbot, I Will no longer trust thee.

Done like a Frenchman: turn and turn again.


Welcome brave Duke, thy friendship makes us fresh.


And does beget new Courage in our Breasts.


Pucell has bravely played her part in this,
And does deserve a Coronet of Gold.

Now let us on, my Lords,
And join our Powers,
And seek how we may prejudice the Foe.

My gracious Prince, and honorable Peers,
Hearing of your arrival in this Realm,
I have a while given Truce unto my Wars,
To do my duty to my Sovereign.
In sign whereof, this Arm, that has reclaym'd
To your obedience, fifty Fortresses,
Twelve Cities, and seven walled Towns of strength,
Beside five hundred Prisoners of esteem;
Lets fall his Sword before your Highness feet:
And with submissiue loyalty of heart
Ascribes the Glory of his Conquest got,
First to my God, and next unto your Grace.

Is this the Lord Talbot, Uncle Gloucester,
That has so long been resident in France?

Yes, if it please your Majesty, my Liege*


Welcome brave Captain, and victorious Lord.
When I was young (as yet I am not old)
I do remember how my Father said,
A stouter Champion never handled Sword.
Long since we were resolved of your truth,
Your faithful service, and your toil in War:
Yet never have you tasted our Reward,
Or been reguerdon'd with so much as Thanks,
Because till now, we never saw your face.
Therefore stand up, and for these good deserts,
We here create you Earl of Shrewsbury,
And in our Coronation take your place.

Now Sir, to you that were so hot at Sea,
Disgracing of these Colors that I wear,
In honor of my Noble Lord of York
Dare thou maintain the former words thou spak'st?

Yes Sir, as well as you dare patronage
The envious barking of your saucy Tongue,
Against my Lord the Duke of Somerset.

Sirrah, thy Lord I honor as he is.


Why, what is he? as good a man as York.


Hark ye: not so: in witness take ye that.


Villain, thou know
The Law of Arms is such,
That who so draws a Sword, it is present death,
Or else this Blow should broach thy dearest Blood.
But I Will unto his Majesty, and crave,
I may have liberty to venge this Wrong,
When thou shall see, I Will meet thee to thy cost.

Well miscreant, I Will be there as soon as you,
And after meet you, sooner then you would,

Lord Bishop set the Crown upon his head.


God save King Henry of that name the sixth.


Now Governor of Paris take your oath,
That you elect no other King but him;
Esteem none Friends, but such as are his Friends,
And none your Foes, but such as shall pretend
Malicious practices against his State:
This shall ye do, so help you righteous God.

My gracious Sovereign, as I rode from Calice,
To haste unto your Coronation:
A Letter was delivered to my hands,
Writ to your Grace, from the Duke of Burgundy.

Shame to the Duke of Burgundy, and thee:
I vowed (base Knight) when I did meet the next,
To tear the Garter from thy Crauens leg,
Which I have done, because (unworthily)
Thou was it installed in that High Degree.
Pardon me Princely Henry, and the rest:
This Dastard, at the battle of Poictiers,
When (but in all) I was six thousand strong,
And that the French were almost ten to one,
Before we met, or that a stroke was given,
Like to a trusty Squire, did run away.
In which assault, we lost twelve hundred men.
My self, and diverse Gentlemen beside,
Were there surpised, and taken prisoners.
Then judge (great Lords) if I have done amiss:
Or whether that such Cowards ought to wear
This Ornament of Knighthood, yea or no?

To say the truth, this fact was infamous,
And ill beseeming any common man;
Much more a Knight, a Captain, and a Leader.

When first this Order was ordained my Lords,
Knights of the Garter were of Noble birth;
Valiant, and Virtuous, full of haughty Courage,
Such as were grown to credit by the wars:
Not fearing Death, nor shrinking for Distress,
But always resolute, in most extremes.
He then, that is not furnished in this sort,
Does but usurp the Sacred name of Knight,
Profaning this most Honorable Order,
And should (if I were worthy to be Judge)
Be quite degraded, like a Hedge-borne Swain,
That does presume to boast of Gentle blood.

Stain to thy Countrymen, thou hear'st thy doom:
Be packing therefore, thou that was it a knight:
Henceforth we banish thee on pain of death.
And now Lord Protector, view the Letter
Sent from our Uncle Duke of Burgundy.

What means his Grace, that he has chaung'd his Style?
No more but plain and bluntly? (To the King.)
Has he forgot he is his Sovereign?
Or does this churlish Superscription
Pretend some alteration in good will?
What Is here? I have upon especial cause,
Moved with compassion of my Countries wrack,
Together with the pitiful complaints
Of such as your oppression feeds upon,
Forsaken your pernicious Faction,
And joined with Charles, the rightful king of France.
O monstrous Treachery: Can this be so?
That in alliance, amity, and oaths,
There should be found such false dissembling guile?

What? does my Uncle Burgundy revolt?


He does my Lord, and is become your foe.


Is that the worst this Letter does contain?


It is the worst, and all (my Lord) he writes.


Why then Lord Talbot there shall talk with him,
And give him chasticement for this abuse.
How say you (my Lord) are you not content?

Content, my Liege? Yes: But yt I am prevented,
I should have begged I might have been employed.

Then gather strength, and march unto him straight:
Let him perceive how ill we brook his Treason,
And what offense it is to flout his Friends.

I go my Lord, in heart desiring still
You may behold confusion of your foes.

Grant me the Combat, gracious Sovereign.


And me (my Lord) grant me the Combat too.


This is my Servant, hear him Noble Prince.


And this is mine (sweet Henry) favor him.


Be patient Lords, and give them leave to speak.
Say Gentlemen, what makes you thus exclaim,
And wherefore crave you Combat? Or with whom?

With him (my Lord) for he has done me wrong.


And I with him, for he has done me wrong.


What is that wrong, whereof you both complain
First let me know, and then I Will answer you.

Crossing the Sea, from England into France,
This Fellow here with envious carping tongue,
Vpbraided me about the Rose I wear,
Saying, the sanguine color of the Leaves
Did represent my Masters blushing cheeks:
When stubbornly he did repugne the truth,
About a certain question in the Law,
Argued betwixt the Duke of York, and him:
With other vile and ignominious terms.
In confutation of which rude reproach,
And in defense of my Lords worthiness,
I crave the benefit of Law of Arms.

And that is my petition (Noble Lord:)
For though he seem with forged queint conceit
To set a gloss upon his bold intent,
Yet know (my Lord) I was prouok'd by him,
And he first took exceptions at this badge,
Pronouncing that the palenesse of this Flower,
Bewrayed the faintness of my Masters heart.

Will not this malice Somerset be left?


Your private grudge my Lord of York, will out,
Though never so cunningly you smother it.

Good Lord, what madness rules in brainesicke men,
When for so slight and frivolous a cause,
Such factious aemulations shall arise?
Good Cosins both of York and Somerset,
Quiet your selves (I pray) and be at peace.

Let this dissension first be tried by fight,
And then your Highness shall command a Peace.

The quarrel touches none but us alone,
Betwixt our selves let us decide it then.

There is my pledge, accept it Somerset.


Nay, let it rest where it began at first.


Confirm it so, mine honorable Lord.


Confirm it so? Confounded be your strife,
And perish ye with your audacious prate,
Presumptuous vassals, are you not ashamed
With this immodest clamorous outrage,
To trouble and disturb the King, and Us?
And you my Lords, me thinks you do not well
To bear with their perverse Objections:
Much less to take occasion from their mouths,
To raise a mutiny betwixt your selves.
Let me persuade you take a better course.

It greeues his Highness,
Good my Lords, be Friends.

Come hither you that would be Combatants:
Henceforth I charge you, as you love our favor,
Quite to forget this Quarrel, and the cause.
And you my Lords: Remember where we are,
In France, amongst a fickle wavering Nation:
If they perceive dissension in our looks,
And that within our selves we disagree;
How will their grudging stomachs be prouok'd
To wilful Disobedience, and Rebel?
Beside, What infamy will there arise,
When Foreign Princes shall be certified,
That for a toy, a thing of no regard,
King Henry's Peers, and chief Nobility,
Destroyed themselves, and lost the Realm of France?
Oh think upon the Conquest of my Father,
My tender years, and let us not forgo
That for a trifle, that was bought with blood.
Let me be Vmper in this doubtful strife:
I see no reason if I wear this Rose,
That any one should therefore be suspicious
I more incline to Somerset, than York:
Both are my kinsmen, and I love them both.
As well they may vpbray'd me with my Crown,
Because (forsooth) the King of Scots is Crowned.
But your discretions better can persuade,
Then I am able to instruct or teach:
And therefore, as we hither came in peace,
So let us still continue peace, and love.
Cousin of York, we institute your Grace
To be our Regent in these parts of France:
And good my Lord of Somerset, unite
Your Troops of horsemen, with his Bands of foot,
And like true Subjects, sons of your Progenitors,
Go cheerfully together, and digest
Your angry Choler on your Enemies.
Our Self, my Lord Protector, and the rest,
After some respit, will return to Calice;
From thence to England, where I hope ere long
To be presented by your Victories,
With Charles, Alanson, and that Traitorous rout.

My Lord of York, I promise you the King
Prettily (me thought) did play the Orator.)

And so he did, but yet I like it not,
In that he wears the badge of Somerset.

Tush, that was but his fancy, blame him not,
I dare presume (sweet Prince) he thought no harm.

And if I wish he did. But let it rest,
Other affairs must now be managed.

Well did thou Richard to suppress thy voice:
For had the passions of thy heart burst out,
I fear we should have seen deciphered there
More rancorous spite, more furious raging broils,
Then yet can be imagined or supposed:
But howsoere, no simple man that sees
This iarring discord of Nobility,
This shouldering of each other in the Court,
This factious bandying of their Favorites,
But that it does presage some ill event.
It Is much, when Scepters are in Childrens hands:
But more, when Envy breeds unkind division,
There comes the ruin, there begins confusion.

Go to the Gates of Bordeaux Trumpeter,
Summon their General unto the Wall.
English John Talbot (Captains) call you forth,
Servant in Arms to Harry King of England,
And thus he would. Open your City Gates,
Be humble to us, call my Sovereign yours,
And do him homage as obedient Subjects,
And I Will withdraw me, and my bloody power.
But if you frown upon this proffered Peace,
You tempt the fury of my three attendants,
Lean Famine, quartering Steel, and climbing Fire,
Who in a moment, eeuen with the earth,
Shall lay your stately, and ayre-brauing Towers,
If you forsake the offer of their love.

Thou ominous and fearful Owl of death,
Our Nations terror, and their bloody scourge,
The period of thy Tyranny approaches,
On us thou can not enter but by death:
For I protest we are well fortified,
And strong enough to issue out and fight.
If thou retire, the Dolphin well appointed,
Stands with the snares of War to tangle thee.
On either hand thee, there are squadrons pitched,
To wall thee from the liberty of Flight;
And no way can thou turn thee for redress,
But death does front thee with apparent spoil,
And pale destruction meets thee in the face:
Ten thousand French have taken the Sacrament,
To ryue their dangerous Artillery
Upon no Christian soul but English Talbot:
Lo, there thou standst a breathing valiant man
Of an invincible unconquered spirit:
This is the latest Glory of thy praise,
That I thy enemy dew thee withal:
For ere the Glass that now begins to run,
Finish the process of his sandy hour,
These eyes that see thee now well colored,
Shall see thee withered, bloody, pale, and dead.
Hark, hark, the Dolphins drum, a warning bell,
Sings heavy Music to thy timorous soul,
And mine shall ring thy dire departure out,

He Fables not, I hear the enemy:
Out some light Horsemen, and peruse their Wings.
O negligent and heedlesse Discipline,
How are we park'd and bounded in a pale?
A little Heard of Englands timorous Dear,
Mazed with a yelping kennell of French Curres.
If we be English Dear, be then in blood,
Not Rascall-like to fall down with a pinch,
But rather moodie mad: And desperate Stagges,
Turn on the bloody Hounds with heads of Steel,
And make the Cowards stand aloof at bay:
Sell every man his life as dear as mine,
And they shall find dear Dear of us my Friends.
God, and S. George, Talbot and Englands right,
Prosper our Colors in this dangerous fight.

Are not the speedy scouts returned again,
That dogged the mighty Army of the Dolphin?

They are returned my Lord, and give it out,
That he is marched to Bordeaux with his power
To fight with Talbot as he marched along.
By your espyals were discovered
Two mightier Troops then that the Dolphin led,
Which joined with him, and made their march for Bordeaux

A plague upon that Villain Somerset,
That thus delays my promised supply
Of horsemen, that were levied for this siege.
Renowned Talbot does expect my aid,
And I am lowted by a Traitor Villain,
And cannot help the noble Cheualier:
God comfort him in this necessity:
If he miscarry, farewell Wars in France.

Thou Princely Leader of our English strength,
Never so needful on the earth of France,
Spur to the rescue of the Noble Talbot,
Who now is girdled with a waste of Iron,
And hemmed about with grim destruction:
To Bordeaux warlike Duke, to Bordeaux York,
Else farewell Talbot, France, and Englands honor.

O God, that Somerset who in proud heart
Does stop my Cornets, were in Talbots place,
So should we save a valiant Gentleman,
By forteyting a Traitor, and a Coward:
Mad ire, and wrathful fury makes me weep,
That thus we dye, while remiss Traitors sleep.

O send some succor to the distressed Lord.


He dies, we loose: I break my warlike word:
We mourn, France smiles: We loose, they daily get,
All long of this vile Traitor Somerset.

Then God take mercy on brave Talbots soul,
And on his Son young John, who two hours since,
I met in travail toward his warlike Father;
This seven years did not Talbot see his son,
And now they meet where both their lives are done.

Alas, what joy shall noble Talbot have,
To bid his young son welcome to his Grave:
Away, vexation almost stoppes my breath,
That sundred friends greet in the hour of death.
Lucie farewell, no more my fortune can,
But curse the cause I cannot aid the man.
Maine, Bloys, Poytiers, and Toures, are won away,
Long all of Somerset, and his delay.

Thus while the Vulture of sedition,
Feeds in the bosom of such great Commanders,
Sleeping neglection does betray to loss:
The Conquest of our scarse-cold Conqueror,
That everliving man of Memory,
Henry the fifth: Whiles they each other cross,
Lives, Honors, Lands, and all, hurrie to loss.

It is too late, I cannot send them now:
This expedition was by York and Talbot,
Too rashly plotted. All our general force,
Might with a sally of the very Town
Be buckled with: the ouer-daring Talbot
Has sullied all his gloss of former Honor
By this vnheedfull, desperate, wild adventure:
York set him on to fight, and dye in shame,
That Talbot dead, great York might bear the name.

Here is Sir William Lucie, who with me
Set from our ore-matcht forces forth for aid.

How now Sir William, whether were you sent?


Whether my Lord, from bought and sold L. Talbot,
Who ring'd about with bold adversity,
Cries out for noble York and Somerset,
To beat assayling death from his weak Regions,
And whiles the honorable Captain there
Drops bloody swet from his warre-wearied limbs,
And in advantage lingering looks for rescue,
You his false hopes, the trust of Englands honor,
Keep off aloof with worthless emulation:
Let not your private discord keep away
The levied succors that should lend him aid,
While he renowned Noble Gentleman
Yield up his life unto a world of odds.
Orleance the Bastard, Charles, Burgundy,
Alanson, Reignard, compass him about,
And Talbot perishes by your default.

York set him on, York should have sent him aid.


And York as fast upon your Grace exclaimes,
Swearing that you withold his levied host,
Collected for this expidition.

York lies: He might have sent, and had the Horse:
I owe him little Duty, and less Love,
And take foul scorn to fawn on him by sending.

The fraud of England, not the force of France,
Has now intrapt the Noble-minded Talbot:
Never to England shall he bear his life,
But dies betrayed to fortune by your strife.

Come go, I will dispatch the Horsemen strait:
Within six hours, they will be at his aid.

Too late comes rescue, he is taken or slain,
For fly he could not, if he would have fled:
And fly would Talbot never though he might.

If he be dead, brave Talbot then adieu.


His Fame lives in the world. His Shame in you.


O young John Talbot, I did send for thee*
To tutor thee in stratagems of War,
That Talbots name might be in thee revived,
When saplesse Age, and weak unable limbs
Should bring thy Father to his drooping Chair.
But O malignant and ill-boading Stars,
Now thou art come unto a Feast of death,
A terrible and vnauoyded danger:
Therefore dear Boy, mount on my swiftest horse,
And I Will direct thee how thou shall escape
By sudden flight. Come, dally not, be gone.

Is my name Talbot? and am I your Son?
And shall I fly? O, if you love my Mother,
Dishonor not her Honorable Name,
To make a Bastard, and a Slave of me:
The World will say, he is not Talbots blood,
That basely fled, when Noble Talbot stood.

Fly, to revenge my death, if I be slain.


He that flies so, will never return again.


If we both stay, we both are sure to dye.


Then let me stay, and Father do you fly:
Your loss is great, so your regard should be;
My worth unknown, no loss is known in me.
Upon my death, the French can little boast;
In yours they will, in you all hopes are lost.
Flight cannot stayne the Honor you have won,
But mine it will, that no Exploit have done.
You fled for Vantage, every one will swear:
But if I bow, they will say it was for fear.
There is no hope that ever I will stay,
If the first hour I shrink and run away:
Here on my knee I beg Mortality,
Rather then Life, preserved with Infamy.

Shall all thy Mothers hopes lie in one Tomb?


I rather then I Will shame my Mothers Womb,


Upon my Blessing I command thee go.


To fight I will, but not to fly the Foe.


Part of thy Father may be saved in thee.


No part of him, but will be shame in me.


Thou never had Renown, nor can not lose it.


Yes, your renowned Name: shall flight abuse it?


Thy Fathers charge shall clear thee from yt stain.


You cannot witness for me, being slain.
If Death be so apparent, then both fly.

And leave my followers here to fight and dye?
My Age was never tainted with such shame.

And shall my Youth be guilty of such blame?
No more can I be severed from your side,
Then can your self, your self in twain divide:
Stay, go, do what you will, the like do I;
For live I will not, if my Father dye.

Then here I take my leave of thee, fair Son,
Borne to eclipse thy Life this afternoon:
Come, side by side, together live and dye,
And Soul with Soul from France to Heaven fly.

Saint George, and Victory; fight Soldiers, fight:
The Regent has with Talbot broke his word,
And left us to the rage of France his Sword.
Where is John Talbot? pawse, and take thy breath,
I gave thee Life, and rescued thee from Death.

O twice my Father, twice am I thy Son:
The Life thou gave me first, was lost and done,
Till with thy Warlike Sword, despite of Fate,
To my determined time thou gave new date.

When from the Dolphins Crest thy Sword struck fire,
It warmed thy Fathers heart with proud desire
Of bold-fac't Victory. Then Leaden Age,
Quickened with Youthful Spleen, and Warlike Rage,
Beat down Alanson, Orleance, Burgundy,
And from the Pride of Gallia rescued thee.
The irefull Bastard Orleance, that drew blood
From thee my Boy, and had the Maidenhood
Of thy first fight, I soon encountered,
And interchanging blows, I quickly shed
Some of his Bastard blood, and in disgrace
Bespoke him thus: Contaminated, base,
And mis-begotten blood, I spill of thine,
Mean and right poor, for that pure blood of mine,
Which thou did force from Talbot, my brave Boy.
Here purposing the Bastard to destroy,
Came in strong rescue. Speak thy Fathers care:
Art thou not weary, John? How do thou fare?
Will thou yet leave the Battle, Boy, and fly,
Now thou art sealed the Son of Chivalry?
Fly, to revenge my death when I am dead,
The help of one stands me in little stead.
Oh, too much folly is it, well I wot,
To hazard all our lives in one small Boat,
If I to day dye not with Frenchmens Rage,
To morrow I shall dye with mickle Age.
By me they nothing gain, and if I stay,
It Is but the shortning of my Life one day.
In thee thy Mother dies, our Households Name,
My Deaths Revenge, thy Youth, and Englands Fame:
All these, and more, we hazard by thy stay;
All these are saved, if thou will fly away.

The Sword of Orleance has not made me smart,
These words of yours draw Lifeblood from my Heart.
On that advantage, bought with such a shame,
To save a paltry Life, and slay bright Fame,
Before young Talbot from old Talbot fly,
The Coward Horse that bears me, fall and dye:
And like me to the pesant Boys of France.
To be Shames scorn, and subject of Mischance.
Surely, by all the Glory you have won,
And if I fly, I am not Talbots Son.
Then talk no more of flight, it is no boot,
If Son to Talbot, dye at Talbots foot.

Then follow thou thy desperate Sire of Creet,
Thou Icarus, thy Life to me is sweet:
If thou will fight, fight by thy Fathers side,
And commendable proved, let us dye in pride.

Where is my other Life? mine own is gone.
O, where is young Talbot? where is valiant John?
Triumphant Death, smeared with Captivity,
Young Talbots Valor makes me smile at thee.
When he perceived me shrink, and on my Knee,
His bloody Sword he brandisht over me,
And like a hungry Lion did commence
Rough deeds of Rage, and stern Impatience:
But when my angry Guardant stood alone,
Tendering my ruin, and assayl'd of none,
Dizzie-ey'd Fury, and great rage of Heart,
Suddenly made him from my side to start
Into the clustring Battle of the French:
And in that Sea of Blood, my Boy did drench
His ouer-mounting Spirit; and there di'de
My Icarus, my Blossom, in his pride.

O my dear Lord, lo where your Son is borne.


Thou antique Death, which laugh'st us here to scorn,
Anon from thy insulting Tyranny,
Coupled in bonds of perpetuity,
Two Talbots winged through the lither Sky,
In thy despite shall escape Mortality.
O thou whose wounds become hard favored death,
Speak to thy father, ere thou yield thy breath,
Brave death by speaking, whither he will or no:
Imagine him a Frenchman, and thy Foe.
Poor Boy, he smiles, me thinks, as who should say,
Had Death been French, then Death had dyed to day.
Come, come, and lay him in his Fathers arms,
My spirit can no longer bear these harms.
Soldiers adieu: I have what I would have,
Now my old arms are young John Talbots grave.

Had York and Somerset brought rescue in,
We should have found a bloody day of this.

How the young whelpe of Talbots raging wood,
Did flesh his punie-sword in Frenchmens blood.

Once I encountered him, and thus I said:
Thou Maiden youth, be vanquished by a Maid.
But with a proud Maiesticall high scorn
He answered thus: Young Talbot was not borne
To be the pillage of a Giglot Wench:
So rushing in the bowels of the French,
He left me proudly, as unworthy fight,

Doubtless he would have made a noble Knight:
See where he lies inherced in the arms
Of the most bloody Nursser of his harms.

Hew them to pieces, hack their bones assunder,
Whose life was Englands glory, Gallia's wonder.

Oh no forbear: For that which we have fled
During the life, let us not wrong it dead.

Herald, conduct me to the Dolphins Tent,
To know who has obtained the glory of the day.

On what submissiue message art thou sent?


Submission Dolphin? Ti^ a mere French word:
We English Warriors wot not what it means.
I come to know what Prisoner; thou have taken,
And to survey the bodies of the dead.

For prisoners askst thou? Hell our prison is.
But tell me whom thou seek'st?

But where is the great Alcides of the field,
Valiant Lord Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury?
Created for his rare success in Arms,
Great Earl of Washford, Waterford, and Valence,
Lord Talbot of Goodrig and Vrchinfield,
Lord Strange of Blackmere, Lord Verdon of Alton,
Lord Cromwell of Wingefield, Lord Furniuall, of Sheffeild,
The thrice victorious Lord of Falconbridge,
Knight of the Noble Order of S. George,
Worthy S. Michael, and the Golden Fleece,
Great Marshall to Henry the sixth,
Of all his Wars within the Realm of France.

Here Is a silly stately style indeed:
The Turk that two and fifty Kingdoms has,
Writes not so tedious a Style as this.
Him that thou magnifi'st with all these Titles,
Stinking and fly-blowne lies here at our feet.

Is Talbot slain, the Frenchmens only Scourge,
Your Kingdoms terror, and black Nemesis?
Oh were mine eye-balles into Bullets turned,
That I in rage might shoot them at your faces.
Oh, that I could but call these dead to life,
It were enough to fright the Realm of France.
Were but his Picture left amongst you here,
It would amaze the prowdest of you all.
Give me their Bodies, that I may bear them hence,
And give them Burial, as beseemes their worth.

I think this vpstart is old Talbots Ghost,
He speaks with such a proud commanding spirit:
For Gods sake let him have him, to keep them here,
They would but stink, and putrify the air.

Go take their bodies hence.


I Will bear them hence: but from their ashes shall be reard
A Phoenix that shall make all France affear'd.

So we be rid of them, do with him what you wilt.
And now to Paris in this conquering vain,
All will be ours, now bloody Talbots slain.

Have you perused the Letters from the Pope,
The Emperor, and the Earl of Arminack?

I have my Lord, and their intent is this,
They humbly sue unto your Excellence,
To have a godly peace concluded of,
Between the Realms of England, and of France.

How does your Grace affect their motion?


Well (my good Lord) and as the only means
To stop effusion of our Christian blood,
And stablish quietness on every side.

I marry Uncle, for I always thought
It was both impious and unnatural,
That such immanity and bloody strife
Should reign among Professors of one Faith.

Beside my Lord, the sooner to effect,
And surer bind this knot of amity,
The Earl of Arminacke near knit to Charles,
A man of great Authority in France,
Proffers his only daughter to your Grace,
In marriage, with a large and sumptuous Dowry.

Marriage Uncle? Alas my years are young:
And fitter is my study, and my Books,
Than wanton dalliance with a Paramour.
Yet call the Ambassadors, and as you please,
So let them have their answers every one:
I shall be well content with any choice
Tends to Gods glory, and my Countries weal.

What, is my Lord of Winchester installed,
And called unto a Cardinals degree?
Then I perceive, that will be verified
Henry the Fifth did sometime prophecy.
If once he come to be a Cardinal,
He Will make his cap coequall with the Crown.

My Lords Ambassadors, your several suites
Have bin considered and debated on,
Your purpose is both good and reasonable:
And therefore are we certainly resolved,
To draw conditions of a friendly peace,
Which by my Lord of Winchester we mean
Shall be transported presently to France.

And for the proffer of my Lord your Master,
I have informed his Highness so at large,
As liking of the Ladies virtuous gifts,
Her Beauty, and the value of her Dower,
He does intend she shall be Englands Queen.

In argument and proof of which contract,
Bear her this Jewel, pledge of my affection.
And so my Lord Protector see them guarded,
And safely brought to Dover, wherein shipped
Commit them to the fortune of the sea.

Stay my Lord Legate, you shall first receive
The sum of money which I promised
Should be delivered to his Holiness,
For clothing me in these grave Ornaments.

I will attend upon your Lordships leisure.


Now Winchester will not submit, I trow,
Or be inferior to the proudest Peer;
Humfrey of Gloucester, thou shall well perceive,
That neither in birth, or for authority,
The Bishop will be ouer-borne by thee:
I Will either make thee stoop, and bend thy knee,
Or sack this Country with a mutiny.

These news (my Lords) may cheer our drooping spirits:
It Is said, the stout Parisians do revolt,
And turn again unto the warlike French.

Then march to Paris Royal Charles of France,
And keep not back your powers in dalliance.

Peace be amongst them if they turn to us,
Else ruin combat with their Palaces.

Success unto our valiant General,
And happiness to his accomplices.

What tidings send our Scouts? I prithee speak.


The English Army that divided was
Into two parties, is now conioyn'd in one,
And means to give you battle presently.

Somewhat too sudden Sirs, the warning is,
But we will presently provide for them.

I trust the Ghost of Talbot is not there:
Now he is gone my Lord, you need not fear.

Of all base passions, Fear is most accursed.
Command the Conquest Charles, it shall be thine:
Let Henry fret, and all the world repine.

Then on my Lords, and France be fortunate.


The Regent conquers, and the Frenchmen fly.
Now help ye charming Spelles and Periapts,
And ye choice spirits that admonish me,
And give me signs of future accidents.
You speedy helpers, that are substitutes
Under the Lordly Monarch of the North,
Appear, and aid me in this enterprise.
This speedy and quick appearance argues proof
Of your accustomed diligence to me.
Now ye Familiar Spirits, that are culled
Out of the powerful Regions under earth,
Help me this once, that France may get the field.
Oh hold me not with silenee ouer-long:
Where I was wont to feed you with my blood,
I Will lop^ member off, and give it you,
In earnest of a further benefit:
So you do condescend to help me now.
No hope to have redress? My body shall
Pay recompense, if you will grant my suite.
Cannot my body, nor blood-sacrifice,
Entreat you to your wonted furtherance?
Then take my soul; my body, soul, and all,
Before that England give the French the foil.
See, they forsake me. Now the time is come,
That France must vale her lofty plumed Crest,
And let her head fall into Englands lap.
My ancient Incantations are too weak,
And hell too strong for me to buckle with:
Now France, thy glory droopcth to the dust.

Damsel of France, I think I have you fast,
Vnchaine your spirits now with spelling Charms,
And try if they can gain your liberty.
A goodly prize, fit for the devils grace.
See how the ugly Witch does bend her brows,
As if with Circe, she would change my shape.

Changed to a worser shape thou can not be:


Oh, Charles the Dolphin is a proper man,
No shape but his can please your dainty eye.

A plaguing mischief light on Charles, and thee,
And may ye both be suddenly surpised
By bloody hands, in sleeping on your beds.

Fell banning Hagge, Inchantresse hold thy tongue.


I prithee give me leave to curse awhile.


Curse Miscreant, when thou comst to the stake


Be what thou will, thou art my prisoner.
Oh Fairest Beauty, do not fear, nor fly:
For I will touch thee but with reverend hands,
I kiss these fingers for eternal peace,
And lay them gently on thy tender side.
Who art thou, say? that I may honor thee.

Margaret my name, and daughter to a King,
The King of Naples, who so ere thou art.

An Earl I am, and Suffolk am I called.
Be not offended Natures miracle,
Thou art allotted to be taken by me:
So does the Swan her downie Signets save,
Keeping them prisoner underneath his wings:
Yet if this servile usage once offend,
Go, and be free again, as Suffolkes friend.
Oh slay: I have no power to let her pass,
My hand would free her, but my heart says no.
As plays the Sun upon the glassie streams,
Twinkling another counterfetted beam,
So seems this gorgeous beauty to mine eyes.
Feign would I woe her, yet I dare not speak:
I Will call for Pen and Ink, and write my mind:
Fie De la Pole, disable not thy self:
Have not a Tongue? Is she not here?
Will thou be daunted at a Woman's sight?
I: Beauties Princely Majesty is such,
'Confounds the tongue, and makes the senses rough.

Say Earl of Suffolk, if thy name be so,
What ransom must I pay before I pass?
For I perceive I am thy prisoner.

How can thou tell she will deny thy suite,
Before thou make a trial of her love?

Why speak thou not? What ransom must I pay?


She Is beautiful; and therefore to be Wooed:
She is a Woman; therefore to be Won.

Will thou accept of ransom, yea or no?


Fond man, remember that thou have a wife,
Then how can Margaret be thy Paramour?

I were best to leave him, for he will not hear.


There all is marred: there lies a cooling card.


He talks at randon: sure the man is mad.


And yet a dispensation may be had.


And yet I would that you would answer me:


I Will win this Lady Margaret. For whom?
Why for my King: Tush, that is a wooden thing.

He talks of wood: It is some Carpenter.


Yet so my fancy may be satisfied,
And peace established between these Realms.
But there remains a scruple in that too:
For though her Father be the King of Naples,
Duke of Aniou and Main, yet is he poor,
And our Nobility will scorn the match.

Hear ye Captain? Are you not at leisure?


It shall be so, disdain they never so much:
Henry is youthful, and will quickly yield.
Madam, I have a secret to reveal.

What though I be inthral'd, he seems a knight
And will not any way dishonor me.

Lady, vouchsafe to listen what I say.


Perhaps I shall be rescued by the French,
And then I need not crave his courtesy.

Sweet Madam, give me hearing in a cause.


Tush, women have been captiuate ere now.


Lady, wherefore talk you so?


I cry you mercy, it is but Quid for Quo.


Say gentle Princess, would you not suppose
Your bondage happy, to be made a Queen?

To be a Queen in bondage, is more vile,
Than is a slave, in base seruility:
For Princes should be free.

And so shall you.
If happy England^ Royal King be free.

Why what concerns his freedom unto me?


I Will undertake to make thee Henry's Queen,
To put a Golden Scepter in thy hand,
And set a precious Crown upon thy head,
If thou will condescend to be my --

What?


His love.


I am unworthy to be Henry's wife.


No gentle Madam, I unworthy am
To woe so fair a Dame to be his wife,
And have no portion in the choice my self.
How say you Madam, are ye so content?

And if my Father please, I am content.


Then call our Captains and our Colors forth,
And Madam, at your Fathers Castle walls,
We Will crave a parley, to confer with him.
See Reignier see, thy daughter prisoner.

To whom?


To me.


Suffolk, what remedy?
I am a Soldier, and unapt to weep,
Or to exclaim on Fortunes fickleness.

Yes, there is remedy enough my Lord,
Consent, and for thy Honor give consent,
Thy daughter shall be wedded to my King,
Whom I with pain have wooed and won thereto:
And this her easy held imprisonment,
Has gained thy daughter Princely liberty.

Speaks Suffolk as he thinks?


Fair Margaret knows,
That Suffolk does not flatter, face, or feign.

Upon thy Princely warrant, I descend,
To give thee answer of thy just demand.

And here I will expect thy coming.


Welcome brave Earl into our Territories,
Command in Aniou what your Honor pleases.

Thanks Reignier, happy for so sweet a Child,
Fit to be made companion with a King:
What answer makes your Grace unto my suite?

Since thou do daigne to woe her little worth,
To be the Princely Bride of such a Lord:
Upon condition I may quietly
Enjoy mine own, the Country Maine and Aniou,
Free from oppression, or the stroke of War,
My daughter shall be Henry's, if he please.

That is her ransom, I deliver her,
And those two Counties I will undertake
Your Grace shall well and quietly enjoy.

And I again in Henry's Royal name,
As Deputy unto that gracious King,
Give thee her hand for sign of plighted faith.

Reignier of France, I give thee Kingly thanks,
Because this is in Traffic of a King.
And yet me thinks I could be well content
To be mine own Attorney in this case.
I Will over then to England with this news.
And make this marriage to be solemnized:
So farewell Reignier, set this Diamond safe
In Golden Palaces as it becomes.

I do embrace thee, as I would embrace
The Christian Prince King Henry were he here.

Farewell my Lord, good wishes, praise, and prayers,
Shall Suffolk ever have of Margaret.

Farewell sweet Madam: but hark you Margaret,
No Princely commendations to my King?

Such commendations as becomes a Maid,
A Virgin, and his Servant, say to him.

Words sweetly placed, and modesty directed,
But Madame, I must trouble you again,
No loving Token to his Majesty?

Yes, my good Lord, a pure unspotted heart,
Never yet taint with love, I send the King.

And this withal.


That for thy self, I will not so presume,
To send such peevish tokens to a King.

Oh were thou for my self: but Suffolk stay,
Thou may not wander in that Labyrinth,
There Minotaurs and ugly Treasons lurk,
Solicit Henry with her wondrous praise.
Bethink thee on her Virtues that surmount,
Mad natural Graces that extinguish Art,
Repeat their semblance often on the Seas,
That when thou come to kneel at Henry's feet,
Thou may bereave him of his wits with wonder.

Bring forth that Sorceresse condemned to burn.


Ah Ione, this kills thy Fathers heart outright,
Have I sought every Country far and near,
And now it is my chance to find thee out,
Must I behold thy timelesse cruel death:
Ah Ione, sweet daughter Ione, I Will die with thee.

Decrepit Miser, base ignoble Wretch,
I am descended of a gentler blood.
Thou art no Father, nor no Friend of mine.

Out, out: My Lords, and please you, it is not so
I did beget her, all the Parish knows:
Her Mother lives yet, can testify
She was the first fruit of my Bach'ler-ship.

Graceless, will thou deny thy Parentage?


This argues what her kind of life has been,
Wicked and vile, and so her death concludes.

Fie Ione, that thou will be so obstacle:
God knows, thou art a collop of my flesh,
And for thy sake have I shed many a tear:
Deny me not, I prithee, gentle Ione.

Pezant auant. You have suborned this man
Of purpose, to obscure my Noble birth.

It Is true, I gave a Noble to the Priest,
The morn that I was wedded to her mother.
Kneel down and take my blessing, good my Gyrle.
Will thou not stoop? Now cursed be the time
Of thy nativity: I would the Milk
Thy mother gave thee when thou suck'st her breast,
Had bin a little Rats-bane for thy sake.
Or else, when thou did keep my Lambs a-field,
I wish some ravenous Wolf had eaten thee.
Do thou deny thy Father, cursed Drab?
O burn her, burn her, hanging is too good.

Take her away, for she has lived too long,
To fill the world with vicious qualities.

First let me tell you whom you have condemned;
Not me, begotten of a Shepherd Swain,
But issued from the Progeny of Kings.
Virtuous and Holy, chosen from above,
By inspiration of Celestial Grace,
To work exceeding miracles on earth.
I never had to do with wicked Spirits.
But you that are polluted with your lusts,
Stained with the guiltless blood of Innocents,
Corrupt and tainted with a thousand Vices:
Because you want the grace that others have,
You judge it straight a thing impossible
To compass Wonders, but by help of devils.
No misconceyued, Ione of Air has been
A Virgin from her tender infancy,
Chaste, and immaculate in very thought,
Whose Maiden-blood thus rigorously effus'd,
Will cry for Vengeance, at the Gates of Heaven.

I, I: away with her to execution.


And hark ye sirs: because she is a Maid,
Spare for no Faggots, let there be enough:
Place barrelles of pitch upon the fatal stake,
That so her torture may be shortened.

Will nothing turn your unrelenting hearts?
Then Ione discouet thine infirmity,
That wartanteth by Law, to be thy privilege.
I am with child ye bloody Homicides:
Murder not then the Fruit within my Womb,
Although ye hale me to a violent death.

Now heaven forfend, the holy Maid with child?


The greatest miracle that ere ye wrought
Is all your strict preciseness come to this?

She and the Dolphin have bin iugling,
I did imagine what would be her refuge.

Well go too, we'll have no Bastards live,
Especially since Charles must Father it.

You are deceyu'd, my child is none of his,
It was Alanson that inioy'd my love.

Alanson that notorious Macheuile?
It dies, and if it had a thousand lives.

Oh give me leave, I have deluded you,
'Twas neither Charles, nor yet the Duke I named,
But Reignier King of Naples that preuayl'd.

A married man, that is most intolerable.


Why here is a Gyrle: I think she knows not well
(There were so many) whom she may accuse.

It Is sign she has been liberal and free.


And yet forsooth she is a Virgin pure,
Strumpet, thy words condemn thy Bra^, and thee.
Use no entreaty, for it is in vain.

Then lead me hence: with whom I leave my curse*
May never glorious Sun reflex his beams
Upon the Country where you make abode:
But darkness, and the gloomy shade of death
Inuiron you, till Mischief and Despair,
Drive you to break your necks, or hang your selves.

Break thou in pieces, and consume to ashes,
Thou foul accursed minister of Hell.

Lord Regent, I do greet your Excellence
With Letters of Commission from the King.
For know my Lords, the States of Christendom,
Moved with remorse of these out-ragious broils,
Have earnestly implored a general peace,
Betwixt our Nation, and the aspyring French;
And here at hand, the Dolphin and his Train
Approaches, to confer about some matter.

Is all our travel turned to this effect,
After the slaughter of so many Peers,
So many Captains, Gentlemen, and Soldiers,
That in this quarrel have been overthrown,
And sold their bodies for their Countries benefit,
Shall we at last conclude effeminate peace?
Have we not lost most part of all the Towns,
By Treason, Falsehood, and by Treachery,
Our great Progenitors had conquered:
Oh Warwick, Warwick, I foresee with grief
The utter loss of all the Realm of France.

Be patient York, if we conclude a Peace
It shall be with such strict and severe Covenants,
As little shall the Frenchmen gain thereby.

Since Lords of England, it is thus agreed,
That peaceful truce shall be proclaimed in France,
We come to be informed by your selves,
What the conditions of that league must be.

Speak Winchester, for boiling choler chokes
The hollow passage of my poisoned voice,
By sight of these our balefull enemies.

Charles, and the rest, it is enacted thus:
That in regard King Henry gives consent,
Of mere compassion, and of lenity,
To ease your Country of distressefull War,
And suffer you to breath in fruitful peace,
You shall become true Liegemen to his Crown.
And Charles, upon condition thou will swear
To pay him tribute, and submit thy self,
Thou shall be placed as Viceroy under him,
And still enjoy thy Regal dignity.

Must he be then as shadow of himself?
Adorn his Temples with a Coronet,
And yet in substance and authority,
Retain but privilege of a private man?
This proffer is absurd, and reasonlesse.

It Is known already that I am possessed
With more then half the Gallian Territories,
And therein reuerenc'd for their lawful King.
Shall I for lucre of the rest vn-vanquisht,
Detract so much from that prerogative,
As to be called but Viceroy of the whole?
No Lord Ambassador, I Will rather keep
That which I have, than coveting for more
Be cast from possibility of all.

Insulting Charles, have thou by secret means
Used intercession to obtain a league,
And now the matter grows to compremize,
Stand'st thou aloof upon Comparison.
Either accept the Title thou vsurp'st,
Of benefit proceeding from our King,
And not of any challenge of Desert,
Or we will plague thee with incessant Wars.

My Lord, you do not well in obstinacy,
To cavil in the course of this Contract:
If once it be neglected, ten to one
We shall not find like opportunity.

To say the truth, it is your policy,
To save your Subjects from such massacre
And ruthlesse slaughters as are daily seen
By our proceeding in Hostility,
And therefore take this compact of a Truce,
Although you break it, when your pleasure serves.

How say thou Charles?
Shall our Condition stand?

It Shall:
Only reserved you claim no interest
In any of our Towns of Garrison.

Then swear Allegiance to his Majesty,
As thou art Knight, never to disobey,
Nor be Rebellious to the Crown of England,
Thou nor thy Nobles, to the Crown of England.
So, now dismiss your Army when ye please:
Hang up your Ensigns, let your Drums be still,
For here we entertain a solemn peace.

Your wondrous rare description (noble Earl)
Of beauteous Margaret has astonished me:
Her virtues graced with external gifts,
Do breed Loves settled passions in my heart,
And like as rigor of tempestuous gustes
Prouokes the mightiest Hulke against the tide,
So am I driven by breath of her Renown,
Either to suffer Shipwreck, or arrive
Where I may have fruition of her Love.

Tush my good Lord, this superficial tale,
Is but a preface of her worthy praise:
The chief perfections of that lovely Dame,
(Had I sufficient skill to utter them)
Would make a volume of enticing lines,
Able to ravish any dull conceit.
And which is more, she is not so Divine,
So full repleate with choice of all delights,
But with as humble lowliness of mind,
She is content to be at your command:
Command I mean, of Virtuous chaste intents,
To Love, and Honor Henry as her Lord.

And otherwise, will Henry never presume:
Therefore my Lord Protector, give consent,
That Marg'ret may be Englands Royal Queen.

So should I give consent to flatter sin,
You know (my Lord) your Highness is betroath'd
Unto another Lady of esteem,
How shall we then dispense with that contract,
And not deface your Honor with reproach?

As does a Ruler with unlawful Oaths,
Or one that at a Triumph, having vowed
To try his strength, forsakes yet the Listes
By reason of his Adversaries odds.
A poor Earls daughter is unequal odds,
And therefore may be bro^e without offense.

Why what (I pray) is Margaret more then that?
Her Father is no better than an Earl,
Although in glorious Titles he excel.

Yes my Lord, her Father is a King,
The King of Naples, and Jerusalem,
And of such great Authority in France,
As his alliance will confirm our peace,
And keep the Frenchmen in Allegiance.

And so the Earl of Arminacke may do,
Because he is near Kinsman unto Charles.

Beside, his wealth does warrant a liberal dower,
Where Reignier sooner will receive, than give.

A Dowre my Lords? Disgrace not so your King,
That he should be so abject, base, and poor,
To choose for wealth, and not for perfect Love.
Henry is able to enrich his Queen,
And not to seek a Queen to make him rich,
So worthless Pezants bargain for their Wives,
As Market men for Oxen, Sheep, or Horse.
Marriage is a matter of more worth,
Then to be dealt in by Atturney-ship:
Not whom we will, but whom his Grace affects,
Must be companion of his Nuptial bed.
And therefore Lords, since he affects her most,
Most of all these reasons binds us,
In our opinions she should be preferred,
For what is wedloeke forced? but a Hell,
An Age of discord and continual strife.
Whereas the contrary brings bliss,
And is a pattern of Celestial peace.
Whom should we match with Henry being a King,
But Margaret, that is daughter to a King:
Her peerless feature, joined with her birth,
Approues her sit for none, but for a King.
Her valiant courage, and undaunted spirit,
(More then in women commonly is seen)
Will answer our hope in issue of a King.
For Henry, son unto a Conqueror,
Is likely to beget more Conquerors,
If with a Lady of so high resolve,
(As is fair Margaret) he be linked in love.
Then yield my Lords, and here conclude with me,
That Margaret shall be Queen, and none but she.

Whether it be through force of your report,
My Noble Lord of Suffolk: Or for that
My tender youth was never yet attaint
With any passion of inflaming Jove,
I cannot tell: but this I am assured,
I feel such sharp dissension in my breast,
Such fierce alarums both of Hope and Fear,
As I am sick with working of my thoughts.
Take therefore shipping, post my Lord to France,
Agree to any covenants, and procure
That Lady Margaret do vouchsafe to come
To cross the Seas to England, and be crowned.
King Henry's faithful and anointed Queen.
For your expenses and sufficient charge,
Among the people gather up a tenth.
Be gone I say, for till you do return,
I rest perplexed with a thousand Cares.
And you (good Uncle) banish all offense:
If you do censure me, by what you were,
Not what you are, I know it will excuse
This sudden execution of my will.
And so conduct me, where from company,
I may reuolue and ruminate my grief.

I grief I fear me, both at first and last.


Thus Suffolk has prevailed, and thus he goes
As did the youthful Paris once to Greece,
With hope to find the like event in love,
But prosper better than the Trojan did:
Margaret shall now be Queen, and rule the King:
But I will rule both her, the King, and Realm.


