I Thought the King had more affected the Duke of Albany, then Cornwall.


It did always seem so to us: But now in the division of the Kingdom, it
appears not which of the Dukes he valewes most, for qualities are so weighed,
that curiosity in neither, can make choice of eithers moity


Is not this your Son, my Lord?


His breeding Sir, has bin at my charge. I have so often blushed to
acknowledge him, that now I am braz'd to it


I cannot conceive you.


Sir, this young Fellows mother could; whereupon she grew round womb'd, and had
indeed (Sir) a Son for her Cradle, ere she had a husband for her bed. Do you
smell a fault


I cannot wish the fault undone, the issue of it, being so proper.


But I have a Son, Sir, by order of Law, some year elder then this; who, yet
is no deerer in my account, though this Knave came something sawcily to the
world before he was sent for: yet was his Mother fair, there was good sport at
his making, and the horson must be acknowledged. Do you know this Noble
Gentleman, Edmond


No, my Lord.


My Lord of Kent:
Remember him hereafter, as my Honorable Friend.

My services to your Lordship.


I must love you, and sue to know you better.


Sir, I shall study deserving.


He has bin out nine years, and away he shall again. The King is coming.


Attend the Lords of France and Burgundy, Gloucester.


I shall, my Lord.


Mean time we shall express our darker purpose.
Give me the Map there. Know, that we have divided
In three our Kingdom: and it is our fast intent,
To shake all Cares and Business from our Age,
Conferring them on younger strengths, while we
Vnburthen'd crawle toward death. Our son of Cornwall,
And you our no less loving Son of Albany,
We have this hour a constant will to publish
Our daughters several Dowers, that future strife
May be prevented now. The Princes, France and Burgundy,
Great Riuals in our youngest daughters love,
Long in our Court, have made their amorous soiourne,
And here are to be answered. Tell me my daughters
(Since now we will diuest us both of Rule,
Interest of Territory, Cares of State)
Which of you shall we say does love us most,
That we, our largest bounty may extend
Where Nature does with merit challenge.
Our eldest borne, speak first.

Sir, I love you more then word can weild ye matter,
Deerer then eyesight, space, and liberty,
Beyond what can be valewed, rich or rare,
No less then life, with grace, health, beauty, honor:
As much as Child ere loved, or Father found.
A love that makes breath poor, and speech unable,
Beyond all manner of so much I love you.

What shall Cordelia speak? Love, and be silent.


Of all these bounds even from this Line, to this,
With shadowie Forests, and with Champains rich'd
With plenteous Rivers, and wide-skirted Meades
We make thee Lady. To thine and Albanies issues
Be this perpetual. What says our second Daughter?
Our dearest Regan, wife of Cornwall?

I am made of that selfe-mettle as my Sister,
And prize me at her worth. In my true heart,
I find she names my very deed of love:
Only she comes too short, that I profess
My self an enemy to all other joys,
Which the most precious square of sense professes,
And find I am alone felicitate
In your dear Highness love.

Then poor Cordelia,
And yet not so, since I am sure my love's
More ponderous then my tongue.

To thee, and thine hereditarie ever,
Remain this ample third of our fair Kingdom,
No less in space, validity, and pleasure
Then that confeir'd on Gonerill. Now our Joy,
Although our last and least; to whose young love*
The Vines of France, and Milk of Burgundy,
Strive to be interest. What can you say, to draw
A third, more opilent then your Sisters? speak.

Nothing my Lord.


Nothing?


Nothing.


Nothing will come of nothing, speak again.


Unhappy that I am, I cannot heave
My heart into my mouth: I love your Majesty
According to my bond, no more nor less.

How, how Cordelia? Mend your speech a little,
Least you may mar your Fortunes.

Good my Lord,
You have begot me, bred me, loved me.
I return those duties back as are right fit,
Obey you, Love you, and most Honor you.
Why have my Sisters Husbands, if they say
They love you all? Happily when I shall wed,
That Lord, whose hand must take my plight, shall carry
Half my love with him, half my Care, and Duty,
Sure I shall never marry like my Sisters.

But goes thy heart with this?


I my good Lord.


So young, and so vntender?


So young my Lord, and true.


Let it be so, thy truth then be thy dowre:
For by the sacred radience of the Sun,
The miseries of Heccat and the night:
By all the operation of the Orbs,
From whom we do exist, and cease to be,
Here I disclaim all my Paternall care,
Propinquity and property of blood,
And as a stranger to my heart and me,
Hold thee from this for ever. The barbarous Scythian,
Or he that makes his generation messes
To gorge his appetite, shall to my bosom
Be as well neighbored, pitied, and releeu'd,
As thou my sometime Daughter.

Good my Liege.


Peace Kent,
Come not between the Dragon and his wrath,
I loved her most, and thought to set my rest
On her kind nursery. Hence and avoid my sight:
So be my grave my peace, as here I give
Her Fathers heart from her; call France, who stirs?
Call Burgundy, Cornwall, and Albanie,
With my two Daughters Dowres, digest the third,
Let pride, which she calls plainness, marry her:
I do inuest you jointly with my power,
Pre-eminence, and all the large effects
That troop with Majesty. Our self by Monthly course,
With reservation of an hundred Knights.
By you to be sustained, shall our abode
Make with you by due turn, only we shall retain
The name, and all the addition to a King: the Sway,
Reuennew Execution of the rest,
Beloved Sons be yours, which to confirm,
This Coronet part between you.

Royal Lear,
Whom I have ever honored as my King*
Loved as my Father, as my Master followed,
As my great Patron thought on in my prayers.

The bow is bent and drawn, make from the shaft.


Let it fall rather, though the forke invade
The region of my heart, be Kent unmannerly,
When Lear is mad, what would thou do old man?
Think thou that duty shall have dread to speak,
When power to flattery bows?
To plainness honor's bound,
When Majesty falls to folly, reserve thy state,
And in thy best consideration check
This hideous rashness, answer my life, my judgment:
Thy youngest Daughter does not love thee least,
Nor are those empty hearted, whose low founds
Reuerbe no hollownesse.

Kent, on thy life no more.


My life I never held but as pawn
To wage against thine enemies, nere fear to loose it,
Thy safety being motive.

Out of my sight.


See better Lear, and let me still remain
The true blanke of thine eye.

Now by Apollo,


Now by Apollo, King
Thou swear*st thy Gods in vain.

O Vassal! Miscreant.


Cor. Dear Sir forbear.


Kill thy Physician, and thy see bestow
Upon the foul disease, revoke thy gift,
Or whilst I can vent clamor from my throat,
I Will tell thee thou do evil.

Hear me recreant, on thine allegiance hear me;
That thou have sought to make us break our vows,
Which we durst never yet; and with strained pride,
To come betwixt our sentences, and our power.
Which, nor our nature, nor our place can bear;
Our potencie made good, take thy reward.
Five days we do allot thee for provision,
To shield thee from disasters of the world,
And on the sixth to turn thy hated back
Upon our kingdom; if on the tenth day following,
Thy banished trunk be found in our Dominions,
The moment is thy death, away. By Jupiter,
This shall not be reuok'd,

Fare thee well King, since thus thou will appear,
Freedom lives hence, and banishment is here;
The Gods to their dear shelter take thee Maid,
That justly think, and have most rightly said:
And your large speeches, may your deeds approve,
That good effects may spring from words of love:
Thus Kent, O Princes, bids you all adieu,
He Will shape his old course, in a Country new.

Here Is France and Burgundy, my Noble Lord.


My Lord of Bugundie,
We first address toward you, who with this King
Has riuald for our Daughter; what in the least
Will you require in present Dower with her,
Or cease your quest of Love?

Most Royal Majesty,
I crave no more then has your Highness offered,
Nor will you tender less?

Right Noble Burgundy,
When she was dear to us, we did hold her so,
But now her price is fallen: Sir, there she stands,
If ought within that little seeming substance,
Or all of it with our displeasure piec'd,
And nothing more may fitly like your Grace,
She Is there, and she is yours.

I know no answer.


Will you with those infirmities she owes,
Vnfriended, new adopted to our hate,
Dow'rd with our curse, and stranger'd with our oath,
Take her or, leave her.

Pardon me Royal Sir,
Election makes not up in such conditions.

Then leave her sir, for by the power that made me,
I tell you all her wealth. For you great King,
I would not from your love make such a stray,
To match you where I hate, therefore beseech you
TO auert your liking a more worthier way,
Then on a wretch whom Nature is ashamed
Almost to acknowledge hers.

This is most strange,
That she whom even but now, was your object.
The argument of your praise* balm of your age,
The best, the dearest, should in this trice of time
Commit a thing so monstrous, to dismantle
So many folds of favor: sure her offense
Must be of such unnatural degree,
That monsters it: Or your fore-voucht affection
Fall into taint, which to believe of her
Must be a faith that reason without miracle
Should never plant in me.

I yet beseech your Majesty.
If for I want that glib and oily Art,
To speak and purpose not, since what I will intend,
I Will do it before I speak, that you make known
It is no vicious blot, murder, or foulness,
No unchaste action or dishonored step
That has deprived me of your Grace and favor,
But even for want of that, for which I am richer,
A still soliciting eye, and such a tongue,
That I am glad I have not, though not to have it,
Has loft me in your liking.

Better thou had*
Not been borne, then not t have pleased me better.

Is it but this? A tardinesse in nature,
Which often leaves the history vnspoke
That it intends to do: my Lord of Burgundy,
What say you to the Lady? Love's not love
When it is mingled with regards, that stands
Aloof from the entire point, will you have her?
She is herself a Dowry.

Royal King,
Give but that portion which your self proposed,
And here I take Cordelia by the hand,
Duchess of Burgundy.

Nothing, I have sworn, I am firm.


I am sorry then you have so lost a Father,
That you must loose a husband.

Peace be with Burgundy,
Since that respect and Fortunes are his love,
I shall not be his wife.

Fairest Cordelia, that art most rich being poor,
Most choice forsaken, and most loved despised,
Thee and thy virtues here I seize upon,
Be it lawful I take up what is cast away.
Gods, Gods! It Is strange, that from their cold'st neglect
My Love should kindle to enflamed respect.
Thy dowrelesse Daughter King, thrown to my chance,
Is Queen of us, of ours, and our fair France:
Not all the Dukes of watrish Burgundy,
Can buy this vnpriz'd precious Maid of me.
Bid them farewell Cordelia, though unkind,
Thou loosest here a better where to find.

Thou have her France, let her be thine, for we
Have no such Daughter, nor shall ever see
That face of hers again, therefore be gone,
Without our Grace, our Love, our Benizon:
Come Noble Burgundy.

Bid farewell to your Sisters.


The Jewels of our Father, with washed eyes
Cordelia leaves you, I know you what you are,
And like a Sister am most loath to call
Your faults as they are named. Love well our Father:
To your professed bosoms I commit him,
But yet alas, stood I within his Grace,
I would prefer him to a better place,
So farewell to you both.

Prescribe not us our duty.


Let your study
Be to content your Lord, who has received you
At Fortunes alms, you have obedience scanted,
And well are worth the want that you have wanted*

Time shall unfold what plighted cunning hides,
Who couers faults, at last with shame derides:
Well may you prosper.

Come my fair Cordelia.


Sister, it is not little I have to say,
Of what most nearly appertains to us both,
I think our Father will hence to night.

That Is most certain, and with you: next month with us.


You see how full of changes his age is, the observation we have made of it
has been little: he always loved our Sister most, and with what poor
judgment he has now cast her off, appears too grossly


It Is the infirmity of his age, yet he has ever but slenderly known himself.


The best and soundest of his time has bin but rash, then must we look from
his age, to receive not alone the imperfections of long ingrafted condition,
but therewithal the unruly way wardnesse, that infirm and choleric years
bring with them


Such unconstant starts are we like to have from him, as this of Kents
banishment


There is further complement of leaue-taking between France and him, pray you
let us sit together, it our Father carry authority with such disposition as he
bears, this last surrender of his will but offend us


We shall further think of it.


We must do something, and in the heat.


Thou Nature art my Goddess, to thy Law
My services are bound, wherefore should I
Stand in the plague of custom, and permit
The curiosity of Nations, to deprive me?
For that I am some twelve, or fourteen Moonshines
Lag of a Brother? Why Bastard? Wherefore base?
When my Dimensions are as well compact,
My mind as generous, and my shape as true
As honest Madams issue? Why brand they us
With Base? With baseness Barstadie? Base, Base?
Who in the lusty stealth of Nature, take
More composition, and fierce quality,
Then does within a dull stale tired bed
Go to the creating a whole tribe of Fops
Got 'tweene a sleep, and wake? Well then,
Legitimate Edgar, I must have your land,
Our Fathers love, is to the Bastard Edmond,
As to the legitimate: fine word: Legitimate.
Well, my Legittimate, if this Letter speed,
And my invention thrive, Edmond the base
Shall to' the Legitimate: I grow, I prosper:
Now Gods, stand up for Bastards.

Kent banished thus? and France in choler parted?
And the King gone to night? Prescribed his power,
Confined to exhibition? All this done
Upon the gad? Edmond, how now? What news?

So please your Lordship, none.


Why so earnestly seek you to put up yt Letter?


I know no news, my Lord.


What Paper were you reading?


Nothing my Lord.


No? what needed then that terrible dispatch of it into your Pocket? The
quality of nothing, has not such need to hide it self. Let Us see: come, if
it be nothing, I shall not need Spectacles


I beseech you Sir, pardon me; it is a Letter from my Brother, that I have not
all ore-read; and for so much as I have perused, I find it not fit for your
ore-looking


Give me the Letter, Sir.


I shall offend, either to detain, or give it:
The Contents, as in part I understand them.
Are too blame.

Let Us see, let us see.


I hope for my Brothers justification, he wrote this but as an essay, or taste
of my Virtue


This policy, and reverence of Age, makes the world bitter to the best of our
times: keeps our Fortunes from us, till our oldnesse cannot relish them. I
begin to find an idle and fond bondage, in the oppression of aged tyranny, who
swayes not as it has power, but as it is suffered. Come to me, that of this I
may speak more. If our Father would sleep till I waked him, you should enjoy
half his Reuennew for ever, and live the beloved of your Brother.

Edgar.



Hum? Conspiracy? Sleep till I wake him, you should enjoy half his Reuennew:
my Son Edgar, had he a hand to write this? A heart and brain to breed it
in? When came you to this? Who brought it


It was not brought me, my Lord; there is the cunning of it. I found it thrown
in at the Casement of my Closset


You know the character to be your Brothers?


If the matter were good my Lord, I durst swear it were his: but in respect of
that, I would feign think it were not


It is his.


It is his hand, my Lord: but I hope his heart is not in the Contents.


Has he never before sounded you in this business?


Never my Lord. But I have heard him often maintain it to be fit, that Sons at
perfect age, and Fathers declined, the Father should be as Ward to the Son,
and the Son manage his Reuennew


O Villain, villain: his very opinion in the Letter. Abhorred Villain,
unnatural, detested, brutish Villain; worse then brutish: Go sirrah, seek
him: I Will apprehend him. Abominable Villain, where is he


I do not well know my L. If it shall please you to suspend your indignation
against my Brother, til you can derive from him better testimony of his intent,
you should run a certain course: where, if you violently proceed against him,
mistaking his purpose, it would make a great gap in your own Honor, and shake
in pieces, the heart of his obedience. I dare pawn down my life for him, that
he has writ this to feel my affection to your Honor, and to no other pretense
of danger


Think you so?


If your Honor judge it mere, I will place you where you shall hear us
confer of this, and by an Auricular assurance have your satisfaction, and
that without any further delay, then this very Evening


He cannot be such a Monster. Edmond seek him out: wind me into him, I pray
you: frame the Business after your own wisdom. I would vnstate my self, to
be in a due resolution


I will seek him Sir, presently: convey the business as I shall find means,
and acquaint you withal


These late Eclipses in the Sun and Moon portend no good to us: though the
wisdom of Nature can reason it thus, and thus, yet Nature finds it self
scourged by the sequent effects. Love cooles, friendship falls off, Brothers
divide. In Cities, mutinies; in Countries, discord; in Palaces, Treason; and
the Bond cracked, 'twixt Son and Father. This villain of mine comes under
the prediction; there is Son against Father, the King falls from by as of Nature,
there is Father against Child. We have seen the best of our time.
Machinations, hollownesse, treachery, and all ruinous disorders follow us
disquietly to our Graves. Find out this Villain* Edmond, it shall lose thee
nothing, do it carefully: and the Noble and true-harted Kent banished; his
offense, honesty. It Is strange


This is the excellent foppery of the world, that when we are sick in fortune,
often the surfers of our own behavior, we make guilty of our disasters, the
Sun, the Moon, and Stars, as if we were villains on necessity, Fools by
heavenly compulsion, Knaves, Thieves, and Treachers by Sphericall predominance.
Drunkards, Liars, and Adulterers by an enforced obedience of Planatary
influence; and all that we are evil in, by a divine thrust^ng on. An admirable
evasion of Whore-master-man, to lay his Goatish disposition on the charge of a
Star, My father compounded with my mother under the Dragons tail, and my
Nativity was under Vrsa Mayor, so that it follows, I am rough and Leacherous.
I should have bin that I am, had the maidenlest Star in the Firmament
twinkled on my bastardizing

Pat: he comes like the Catastrophe of the old Comedy: my Cue is villainous
Melancholy, with a sighe like Tom of Bedlam. -- O these Eclipses do portend
these divisions. Fa, Sol, La, Me


How now Brother Edmond, what serious contemplation are you in?


I am thinking Brother of a prediction I read this other day, what should
follow these Eclipses


Do you busy your self with that?


I promise you, the effects he writes of, succeed unhappily.
When saw you my Father last?

The night gone by.


Spoke you with him?


I, two hours together.


Parted you in good terms? Found you no displeasure in him, by word, nor
countenance


None at all,


Bethink your self wherein you may have offended him: and at my entreaty
forbear his presence, until some little time has qualified the heat of his
displeasure, which at this instant so rages in him, that with the mischief of
your person, it would scarsely alay


Some Villain has done me wrong.


That Is my fear, I pray you have a continent forbearance till the speed of his
rage goes slower: and as I say, retire with me to my lodging, from whence I
will fitly bring you to hear my Lord speak: pray ye go, there is my key: if
you do stir abroad, go armed


Armed, Brother?


Brother, I advise you to the best, I am no honest man, if there be any good
meaning toward you: I have told you what I have seen, and heard: But faintly,
Nothing like the image, and horror of it, pray you away


Shall I hear from you anon?


I do serve you in this business:
A Credulous Father, and a Brother Noble,
Whose nature is so far from doing harms,
That he suspects none: on whose foolish honesty
My practices ride easy: I see the business.
Let me, if not by birth, have lands by wit,
All with me's meet, that I can fashion fit.

Did my Father strike my Gentleman for chiding of his Fool?


I Madam.


By day and night, he wrongs me, every hour
He flashes into one gross crime, or other,
That sets us all at ods: I Will not endure it;
His Knights grow riotous, and himself vpbraides us
On every trifle. When he returns from hunting,
I will not speak with him, say I am sick,
If you come slack of former services,
You shall do well, the fault of it I Will answer.

He Is coming Madam, I hear him.


Put on what weary negligence you please,
You and your Fellows: I Would have it come to question;
If he distaste it, let him to my Sister,
Whose mind and mine I know in that are one,
Remember what I have said.

Well Madam.


And let his Knights have colder looks among you: what grows of it no matter,
advise your fellows so, I Will write straight to my Sister to hold my course;
prepare for dinner


If but as will I other accents borrow,
That can my speech defuse, my good intent
May carry through it self to that full issue
For which I raiz'd my likeness. Now banished Kent,
If thou can serve where thou do stand condemned,
So may it come, thy Master whom thou Iou'st,
Shall find thee full of labors.

Let me not stay a jot for dinner, go get it ready: how now, what art thou?


A man Sir.


What do thou profess? What would thou with us?


I do profess to be no less then I seem; to serve him truly that will put
me in trust, to love him that is honest, to converse with him that is wise and
says little, to fear judgment, to fight when I cannot choose, and to eat no
fish


What art thou?


A very honest hearted Fellow, and as poor as the King.


If thou be'st as poor for a subject, as he is for a King, thou art poor
enough. What would thou


Service.


Who would thou serve?


You.


Do thou know me fellow?


No Sir, but you have that in your countenance, which I would feign call Master.


What Is that?


Authority.


What services can thou do?


I can keep honest counsel, ride, run, mar a curious tale in telling it,
and deliver a plain message bluntly: that which ordinary men are fit for, I am
quallified in, and the best of me, is Diligence


How old art thou?


Not so young Sir to love a woman for singing, nor so old to dote on her for
any thing. I have years on my back forty eight


Follow me, thou shall serve me, if I like thee no worse after dinner, I will
not part from thee yet. Dinner ho, dinner, where is my knave? my Fool? Go you
and call my Fool hither. You you Sirrah, where is my Daughter


So please you --


What says the Fellow there? Call the Clot-pole back: where is my Fool? Ho, I
think the world's asleep, how now? Where Is that Mungrell


He says my Lord, your Daughters is not well.


Why came not the slave back to me when I called him?


Sir, he answered me in the roundest manner, he would not.


He would not?


My Lord, I know not what the matter is, but to my judgment your Highness is
not entertained with that Ceremonious affection as you were wont, there is a
great abatement of kindness appears as well in the general dependants, as in
the Duke himself also, and your Daughter


Ha? Say thou so?


I beseech you pardon me my Lord, if I be mistaken, for my duty cannot be
silent, when I think your Highness wronged


Thou but remembrest me of mine own Conception, I have perceived a most faint
neglect of late, which I have rather blamed as mine own jealous curiosity,
then as a very pretense and purpose of unkindness; I will look further
intoo't^: but where is my Fool? I have not seen him this two days


Since my young Ladies going into France
Sir, the Fool has much pined away.

No more of that, I have noted it well, go you and tell my Daughter, I would
speak with her. Go you call hither my Fool; Oh you Sir, you, come you hither
Sir, who am I Sir


My Ladies Father.


My Ladies Father? my Lords knave, you whoreson dog, you slave, you curre.


I am none of these my Lord,
I beseech your pardon.

Do you bandy looks with me, you Rascal?


I Will not be stricken my Lord.


Nor tript neither, you base Football plaier.


I thank thee fellow.
Thou seru'st me, and I Will love thee.

Come sir, arise, away, I Will teach you differences: away, away, if you will
measure your lubbers length again, tarry, but away, go too, have you
wisdom, so


Now my friendly knave I thank thee, there is earnest of thy service.


Let me hire him too, here is my Coxcombe.


How now my pretty knave, how do thou?


Sirrah, you were best take my Coxcombe.


Why my Boy?


Why? for taking ones part that is out of favor, nay, and thou can not smile
as the wind sits, thou wilt catch cold shortly, there take my Coxcombes why this
fellow has banished two on's Daughters, and did the third a blessing against
his will, if thou follow him, thou must needs wear my Coxcombe. How now
Nunckle? would I had two Coxcombes and two Daughters


Why my Boy?


If I gave them all my living, I Would keep my Coxcombes my self, there is mine,
beg another of thy Daughters


Take heed Sirrah, the whip.


Truth's a dog must to kennell, he must be whipped out, when the Lady Brach may
stand by' the fire and stink


A pestilent gall to me.


Sirrah, I Will teach thee a speech.


Do.


Mark it Nuncle;
Have more then thou showest,
Speak less then thou know,
Lend less then thou owe,
Ride more then thou go,
Learn more then thou trowest,
Set less then thou throwest;
Leave thy drink and thy whore,
And keep in a door,
And thou shall have more,
Then two tens to a score.

This is nothing Fool.


Then it is like the breath of an vnfeed Lawyer, you gave me nothing for it, can
you make no use of nothing Nuncle


Why no Boy,
Nothing can be made out of nothing.

Prithee tell him, so much the rent of his land comes to, he will not believe a
Fool


A bitter Fool.


Do thou know the difference my Boy, between a bitter Fool, and a sweet
one


No Lad, teach me.


Nunckle, give me an egg, and I Will give thee two Crowns.


What two Crowns shall they be?


Why after I have cut the egg in the middle and eat up the meat, the two
Crowns of the egg: when thou clouest thy Crowns in the middle, and gave
away both parts, thou boar'st thine Ass on thy back over the dirt, thou
had little wit in thy bald crown, when thou gave thy golden one away; if
I speak like my self in this, let him be whipped that first finds it so

Fools had nere less grace in a year,
For wisemen are grown foppish,
And know not how their wits to wear,
Their manners are so apish.

When were you wont to be so full of Songs sirrah?


I have used it Nunckle, ere since thou made thy Daughters thy Mothers, for
when thou gave them the rod, and put'st down thine own breeches, then the

For sudden joy did weep,
And I for sorrow sung,
That such a King should play bo-peepe,
And go the Fool among.
Pry' thy Nunckle keep a Schoolmaster that can teach
thy Fool to lie, I would feign learn to lie.

And you lie sirrah, we will have you whipped.


I marvel what kin thou and thy daughters are, they will have me whipped for
speaking true: thou wilt have me whipped for lying; and sometimes I am whipped for
holding my peace. I had rather be any kind of thing then a fool, and yet I
would not be thee Nunckle, thou have pared thy wit of both sides, and left
nothing in the middle; here comes one of the parings


How now Daughter? what makes that Frontlet on? You are too much of late in the
frown


Thou wast a pretty fellow when thou had no need to care for her frowning,
now thou art an O without a figure, I am better then thou art now, I am a
Fool, thou art nothing. Yes forsooth I will hold my tongue, so your face bids
me, though you say nothing

Mum, mum, he that keeps nor crust, not crum,
Weary of all, shall want some. That Is a sheal'd Pescod.

Not only Sir this, your all-lycenc'd Fool,
But other of your insolent retinue
Do hourly Carpe and Quarrel, breaking forth
In rank, and (not to be endured) riots Sir.
I had thought by making this well known unto you,
To have found a safe redress, but now grow fearful
By what your self too late have spoke and done,
That you protect this course, and put it on
By your allowance, which if you should, the fault
Would not escape censure, nor the redresses sleep,
Which in the tender of a wholesome weal,
Might in their working do you that offense,
Which else were shame, that then necessity
Will call discreet proceeding.

For you know Nunckle, the Hedge-Sparrow fed the Cuckoo so long, that it is had
it head bit off by it young, so out went the Candle, and we were left darkling


Are you our Daughter?


I would you would make use of your good wisdom
(Whereof I know you are fraught) and put away
These dispositions, which of late transport you
From what you rightly are.

May not an Ass know, when the Cart draws the Horse?
Whoop Judge I love thee.

Does any here know me?
This is not Lear:
Does Lear walk thus? Speak thus? Where are his eyes?
Either his Notion weakens, his Discernings
Are Lethargied. Ha! Waking? It Is not so?
Who is it that can tell me who I am?

Lears shadow.


Your name, fair Gentlewoman?


This admiration Sir, is much of the savor
Of other your new prankes. I do beseech you
To understand my purposes aright:
As you are Old, and Reverend, should be Wise.
Here do you keep a hundred Knights and Squires,
Men so disordered, so debosh'd, and bold,
That this our Court infected with their manners,
Shows like a riotous Inn; Epicurisme and Lust
Makes it more like a Tavern, or a Brothell,
Then a graced Palace. The shame it self does speak
For instant remedy. Be then desired
By her, that else will take the thing she begges,
A little to disquantity your Train,
And the remainders that shall still depend,
To be such men as may besort your Age,
Which know themselves, and you.

Darkness, and Devils.
Saddle my horses: call my Train together.
Degenerate Bastard, I Will not trouble thee;
Yet have I left a daughter.

You strike my people, and your disordered rabble, make Servants of their
Betters


Woe, that too late repents:
Is it your will, speak Sir? Prepare my Horses.
Ingratitude! thou Marble-hearted Fiend,
More hideous when thou show thee in a Child,
Then the Sea Monster.

Pray Sir be patient.


Detested Kite, thou lie.
My Train are men of choice, and rarest parts,
That all particulars of duty know,
And in the most exact regard, support
The worships of their name. O most small fault,
How ugly did thou in Cordelia show?
Which like an Engine, wrencht my frame of Nature
From the fixed place: drew from my heart all love,
And added to the gall. O Lear, Lear, Lear!
Beat at this gate that let thy Folly in,
And thy dear Judgment out. Go, go, my people.

My Lord, I am guiltless, as I am ignorant
Of what has moved you.

It may be so, my Lord.
Hear Nature, hear dear Goddess, hear:
Suspend thy purpose, if thou did intend
To make this Creature fruitful:
Into her Womb convey stirrility,
Dry up in her the Organs of increase,
And from her derogate body, never spring
A Babe to honor her. If she must teeme,
Create her child of Spleen, that it may live
And be a thwart disnatur'd torment to her.
Let it stamp wrinkles in her brow of youth,
With cadent Tears fret Channels in her cheeks,
Turn all her Mothers pains, and benefits
To laughter, and contempt: That she may feel,
How sharper then a Serpents tooth it is,
To have a thanklesse Child. Away, away.

Now Gods that we adore,
Whereof comes this?

Never afflict your self to know more of it:
But let his disposition have that scope
As dotage gives it.

What fifty of my Followers at a clap?
Within a fortnight?

What Is the matter, Sir?


I Will tell thee:
Life and death, I am ashamed
That thou have power to shake my manhood thus,
That these hot tears, which break from me perforce
Should make thee worth them.
Blastes and Fogges upon thee:
The vntented woundings of a Fathers curse
Pierce every sense about thee. Old fond eyes,
Beweepe this cause again, I Will pluck ye out,
And cast you with the waters that you loose
To temper Clay. Ha? Let it be so.
I have another daughter,
Who I am sure is kind and comfortable:
When she shall hear this of thee, with her nails
She Will flea thy Woluish visage. Thou shall find,
That I Will resume the shape which thou do think
I have cast off for ever.

Do you mark that?


I cannot be so partial Gonerill,
To the great love I bear you.

Pray you content. What Oswald, hoa?
You Sir, more Knave then Fool, after your Master.

Nunkle Lear, Nunkle Lear,
Tarry, take the Fool with thee:
A Fox, when one has caught her.
And such a Daughter,
Should sure to the Slaughter,
If my Cap would buy a Halter,
So the Fool follows after.

This man has had good Counsel,
A hundred Knights?
It Is politic, and safe to let him keep
At point a hundred Knights: yes, that on every dream,
Each buz, each fancy, each complaint, dislike,
He may enguard his dotage with their powers,
And hold our lives in mercy. Oswald, I say.

Well, you may fear too far.


Safer then trust too far;
Let me still take away the harms I fear,
Not fear still to be taken. I know his heart,
What he has vtter'd I have writ my Sister:
If she sustain him, and his hundred Knights
When I have showed the unfitness.
How now Oswald?
What have you writ that Letter to my Sister?

I Madam.


Take you some company, and away to horse,
Inform her full of my particular fear,
And thereto add such reasons of your own,
As may compact it more. Get you gone,
And hasten your return; no, no, my Lord,
This milky gentleness, and course of yours
Though I condemn not, yet under pardon
Your are much more at task for want of wisdom,
Then prai'sd for harmefull mildness.

How far your eyes may pierce I cannot tell;
Striving to better, often we mar what is well.

Nay then --


Well, well, the'uent.


Go you before to Gloucester with these Letters; acquaint my Daughter no further
with any thing you know, then comes from her demand out of the Letter, if your
Diligence be not speedy, I shall be there before you


I will not sleep my Lord, till I have delivered your Letter.


If a man's brains were in's heels, were not in danger of kybes?


I Boy.


Then I prithee be merry, thy wit shall not go slip-shod.


Ha, ha, ha.


Shall see thy other Daughter will use thee kindly, for though she is as like
this, as a Crabbe's like an Apple, yet I can tell what I can tell


What can tell Boy?


She will taste as like this as, a Crabbe does to a Crab: thou can tell why
ones nose stands in the middle on's face


No.


Why to keep ones eyes of either side's nose, that what a man cannot smell
out, he may spy into


I did her wrong.


Can tell how an Oyster makes his shell?


No.


Nor I neither; but I can tell why a Snaile has a house.


Why?


Why to put's head in, not to give it away to his daughters, and leave his
horns without a case


I will forget my Nature, so kind a Father? Be my Horses ready?


Thy Asses are gone about 'em; the reason why the seven Stars are no mo then
seven, is a pretty reason


Because they are not eight.


Yes indeed, thou would make a good Fool.


To take it again perforce; Monster Ingratitude!


If thou were my Fool Nunckle, Il'd have thee beaten for being old before thy
time


How Is that?


Thou should not have bin old, till thou had bin wise.


O let me not be mad, not mad sweet Heaven* keep me in temper, I would not be
mad. How now are the Horses ready


Ready my Lord.


Come Boy.


She that is a Maid now, and laughs at my departure,
Shall not be a Maid long, unless things be cut shorter.

Save thee Curan.


And your Sir, I have bin
With your Father, and given him notice
That the Duke of Cornwall, and Regan his Duchess
Will be here with him this night.

How comes that?


Nay I know not, you have heard of the news abroad, I mean the whispered
ones, for they are yet but ear^-kissing arguments


Not I: pray you what are they?


Have you heard of no likely Wars toward,
'Twixt the Dukes of Cornwall, and Albany?

Not a word.


You may do then in time,
Fare you well Sir.

The Duke be here to night? The better best,
This weaues it self perforce into my business,
My Father has set guard to take my Brother,
And I have one thing of a queazie question
Which I must act, Briefness, and Fortune work.
Brother, a word, descend; Brother I say,
My Father watches: O Sir, fly this place,
Intelligence is given where you are hid;
You have now the good advantage of the night,
Have you not spoken against the Duke of Cornwall?
He Is coming hither, now in the night, in the haste,
And Regan with him, have you nothing said
Upon his party against the Duke of Albany?
Advise your self.

I am sure on it, not a word.


I hear my Father coming, pardon me:
In cunning, I must draw my Sword upon you:
Draw, seem to defend your self,
Now quit you well.
Yield, come before my Father, light hoa, here,
Fly Brother, Torches, Torches, so farewell.
Some blood drawn on me, would beget opinion
Of my more fierce endeavor. I have seen drunkards
Do more then this in sport* Father, Father,
Stop, stop, no help?

Now Edmund, where is the villain?


Here stood he in the dark, his sharp Sword out,
Mumbling of wicked charms, coniuring the Moon
To stand auspicious Mistress.

But where is he?


Look Sir, I bleed.


Where is the villain, Edmund?


Fled this way Sir, when by no means he could.


Pursue him, ho: go after. By no means, what?


Persuade me to the murder of your Lordship,
But that I told him the revenging Gods,
Against Paricides did all the thunder bend,
Spoke with how manifold, and strong a Bond
The Child was bound to' the Father; Sir in fine,
Seeing how lothly opposite I stood
To his unnatural purpose, in fell motion
With his prepared Sword, he charges home
My unprovided body, latch'd mine arm;
And when he saw my best alarmed spirits
Bold in the quarrels right, roused to the encounter,
Or whether gasted by the noise I made,
Full suddenly he fled.

Let him fly far:
Not in this Land shall he remain vncaught
And found; dispatch, the Noble Duke my Master,
My worthy Arch and Patron comes to night,
By his authority I will proclaim it,
That he which finds him shall deserve our thanks,
Bringing the murderous Coward to the stake:
He that conceales him death.

When I dissuaded him from his intent,
And found him pight to do it, with cursed speech
I threatened to discover him; he replied,
Thou vnpossessing Bastard, do thou think,
If I would stand against thee, would the reposall
Of any trust, virtue, or worth in thee
Make thy words faith'd? No, what should I deny,
(As this I would, though thou did produce
My very Character) I Would turn it all
To thy suggestion, plot, and damned practice:
And thou must make a dullard of the world,
If they not thought the profits of my death
Were very pregnant and potentiall spirits
To make thee seek it.

O strange and fastened Villain,
Would he deny his Letter, said he?
Hark, the Dukes Trumpets, I know not where he comes;
All Ports I Will bar, the villain shall not escape,
The Duke must grant me that: besides, his picture
I will send far and near, that all the kingdom
May have due note of him, and of my land,
(Loyal and natural Boy) I Will work the means
To make thee capable.

How now my Noble friend, since I came hither
(Which I can call but now,) I have heard strangeness.

If it be true; all vengeance comes too short
Which can pursue the offender; how do my Lord?

O Madam, my old heart is cracked, it is cracked.


What, did my Fathers Godsonne seek your life?
He whom my Father named, your Edgar?

O Lady, Lady, shame would have it hid.


Was he not companion with the riotous Knights
That tended upon my Father?

I know not Madam, it is too bad, too bad.


Yes Madam, he was of that consort.


No marvel then, though he were ill affected,
It Is they have put him on the old man's death,
To have the expense and wast of his Revenues:
I have this present evening from my Sister
Been well informed of them, and with such cautions,
That if they come to soiourne at my house,
I Will not be there.

Nor I, assure thee Regan;
Edmund, I hear that you have shown your Father
A Child-like Office.

It was my duty Sir.


He did bewray his practice, and received
This hurt you see, striving to apprehend him.

Is he pursued?


I my good Lord.


If he be taken, he shall never more
Be feared of doing harm, make your own purpose,
How in my strength you please: for you Edmund,
Whose virtue and obedience does this instant
So much commend it self, you shall be ours,
Nature's of such deep trust, we shall much need:
You we first seize on.

I shall serve you Sir truly, how ever else.


For him I thank your Grace.


You know not why we came to visit you?


Thus out of season, thredding dark eyed night,
Occasions Noble Gloucester of some prize,
Wherein we must have use of your advise.
Our Father he has writ, so has our Sister,
Of differences, which I best though it fit
To answer from our home: the several Messengers
From hence attend dispatch, our good old Friend,
Lay comforts to your bosom, and bestow
Your needful counsel to our businesses,
Which craves the instant use.

I serve you Madam,
Your Graces are right welcome.

Good dawning to thee Friend, art of this house?


I.


Where may we set our horses?


IN the mire.


Prithee, if thou love me, tell me.


I love thee not.


Why then I care not for thee.


If I had thee in Lipsbury Pinfold, I would make thee care for me.


Why do thou use me thus? I know thee not.


Fellow I know thee.


What do thou know me for?


A Knave, a Rascal, an eater of broken meats, a base, proud, shallow,
beggarly, three-suited-hundred pound, filthy woosted-stocking knave, a
Lilly-liuered, action-taking, whoreson glasse-gazing super-seruiceable finicall
Rogue, one Trunke-inheriting slave, one that would be a Baud in way of good
service, and art nothing but the composition of a Knave, Beggar, Coward,
Pandar, and the Son and Heir of a Mungrill Bitch, one whom I will beat into
clamours whining, if thou deny'st the least syllable of thy addition


Why, what a monstrous Fellow art thou, thus to rail on one, that is neither
known of thee, nor knows thee


What a brazen-faced Varlet art thou, to deny thou know me? Is it two days
since I tript up thy heels, and beat thee before the King? Draw you rogue,
for though it be night, yet the Moon shines, I Will make a sop oth' Moonshine of
you, you whoreson Cullyenly Barber-monger, draw


Away, I have nothing to do with thee.


Draw you Rascal, you come with Letters against the King, and take Vanity the
puppets part, against the Royalty of her Father: draw you Rogue, or I Will so
carbonado your shanks, draw you Rascal, come your ways


Help, ho, murder, help.


Strike you slave: stand rogue, stand you neat slave, strike.


Help hoa, murder, murder.


How now, what is the matter? Part.


With you goodman Boy, if you please, come,
I Will flesh ye, come on young Master.

Weapons? Arms? what is the matter here?


Keep peace upon your lives, he dies that strikes again, what is the matter?


The Messengers from our Sister, and the King?


What is your difference, speak?


I am scarce in breath my Lord.


No Marvel, you have so bestir'd your valor, you cowardly Rascal, nature
disclaimes in thee: a Tailor made thee


Thou art a strange fellow, a Tailor make a man?


A Tailor Sir, a Stone-cutter, or a Painter, could not have made him so ill,
though they had bin but two years oth' trade


Speak yet, how grew your quarrel?


This ancient Ruffian Sir, whose life I have spared at suit of his gray-beard.


Thou whoreson Zed, thou unnecessary letter: my Lord, if you will give me
leave, I will tread this vnboulted villain into mortar, and daube the wall of
a Iakes with him. Spare my gray-beard, you wagtaile


Peace sirrah,
You beastly knave, know you no reverence?

Yes Sir, but anger has a privilege.


Why art thou angry?


That such a slave as this should wear a Sword,
Who wears no honesty: such smiling rogues as these,
Like Rats often bite the holy cords a twain,
Which are to intrince, to unloose: smooth every passion
That in the natures of their Lords rebel,
Being oil to fire, snow to the colder moodes,
Revenge, affirm, and turn their Halcion beakes
With every gall, and varry of their Masters,
Knowing naught (like dogs) but following:
A plague upon your Epilepticke visage,
Smoile you my speeches, as I were a Fool?
Goose, if I had you upon Sarum Plain,
I Would drive ye cackling home to Camelot.

What art thou mad old Fellow?


How fell you out, say that?


No contraries hold more antipathy,
Then I, and such a knave.

Why do thou call him Knave?
What is his fault?

His countenance likes me not.


No more perchance does mine, not his, nor hers.


Sir, it is my occupation to be plain,
I have seen better faces in my time,
Then stands on any shoulder that I see
Before me, at this instant.

This is some Fellow,
Who having been praised for bluntness, does affect
A saucy roughnes, and constraines the garb
Quite from his Nature. He cannot flatter he,
An honest mind and plain, he must speak truth,
And they will take it so, if not, he is plain.
These kind of Knaves I know, which in this plainness
Harbor more craft, and more corrupter ends,
Then twenty silly-ducking obseruants,
That stretch their duties nicely.

Sir, in good faith, in sincere verity,
Under the allowance of your great aspect,
Whose influence like the wreath of radient fire
On flicking Phoebus front.

What mean by this?


To go out of my dialect, which you discommend so much; I know Sir, I am no
flatterer, he that beguild you in a plain accent, was a plain Knave, which
for my part I will not be, though I should win your displeasure to entreat me
to it


What was the offense you gave him?


I never gave him any:
It pleased the King his Master very late
To strike at me upon his misconstruction,
When he compact, and flattering his displeasure
Tript me behind: being down, insulted, railed,
And put upon him such a deal of Man,
That worthied him, got praises of the King,
For him attempting, who was selfe-subdued,
And in the fleshment of this dead exploit,
Drew on me here again.

None of these Rogues, and Cowards
But Ajax is there Fool.

Fetch forth the Stocks?
You stubborn ancient Knave, you reverent Bragart,
We Will teach you.

Sir, I am too old to learn:
Call not your Stocks for me, I serve the King.
On whose employment I was sent to you,
You shall do small respects, show too bold malice
Against the Grace, and Person of my Master,
Stocking his Messenger.

Fetch forth the Stocks;
As I have life and Honor, there shall he sit till Noone.

Till noone? till night my Lord, and all night too.


Why Madam, if I were your Fathers dog,
You should not use me so.

Sir, being his Knave, I will.


This is a Fellow of the self same color,
Our Sister speaks of. Come, bring away the Stocks.

Let me beseech your Grace, not to do so,
The King his Master, needs must take it ill
That he so slightly valued in his Messenger,
Should have him thus restrained.

I Will answer that.


My Sister may recieue it much more worsse,
To have her Gentleman abused, assaulted.

Come my Lord, away.


I am sorry for thee friend, it is the Duke pleasure,
Whose disposition all the world well knows
Will not be rubbed nor stopped, I Will entreat for thee.

Pray do not Sir, I have watched and trauail'd hard,
Some time I shall sleep out, the rest I Will whistle:
A good man's fortune may grow out at heels:
Give you good morrow.

The Duke's too blame in this,
'Twill be ill taken.

Good King, that must approve the common saw,
Thou out of Heavens benediction come
To the warm Sun.
Approach thou Beacon to this under Globe,
That by thy comfortable Beams I may
Peruse this Letter. Nothing almost sees miracles
But misery. I know it is from Cordelia,
Who has most fortunately been informed
Of my obscured course. And shall find time
From this enormous State, seeking to give
Losses their remedies. All weary and o're-watch'd,
Take vantage heavy eyes, not to behold
This shameful lodging. Fortune goodnight,
Smile once more, turn thy wheel.

I heard my self proclaimed,
And by the happy hollow of a Tree,
Escaped the hunt. No Port is free, no place
That guard, and most vnusall vigilance
Does not attend my taking. Whiles I may escape
I will preserve myself: and am bethought
To take the basest, and most poorest shape
That ever penury in contempt of man,
Brought near to beast; my face I Will grime with filth,
Blanket my loins, else all my hairs in knots,
And with presented nakedness outface
The Winds, and persecutions of the sky;
The Country gives me proof, and president
Of Bedlam beggars, who with roaring voices,
Strike in their num'd and mortified Arms,
Pins, Wodden-prickes, Nails, Sprigs of Rosemarie:
And with this horrible object, from low Farms,
Poor pelting Villages, Sheeps-Coates, and Milles,
Sometimes with Lunaticke bans, sometime with Prayers
Enforce their charity: poor Turlygod, poor Tom,
That Is something yet: Edgar I nothing am.

It Is strange that they should so depart from home,
And not send back my Messengers.

As I learned,
The night before, there was no purpose in them
Of this remove.

Hail to thee Noble Master.


Ha? Make thou this shame ahy pastime?


No my Lord.


Hah, ha, he wears Cruel Garters Horses are tide by the heads, Dogs and
Bears by' the neck, Monkies by' the loins, and Men by' the legs: when a man
ouerlustie at legs, then he wears wodden nether-stocks


What Is he*
That has so much thy place mistook
To set thee here?

It is both he and she,
Your Son, and Daughter.

No.


Yes.


No I say.


I say yea.


By Jupiter I swear no.


By Juno, I swear I.


They durst not do it:
They could not, would not do it: it is worse then murder,
To do upon respect such violent outrage:
Resolve me with all modest haste, which way
Thou might deserve, or they impose this usage,
Coming from us.

My Lord, when at their home
I did commend your Highness Letters to them,
Ere I was risen from the place, that showed
My duty kneeling, came there a reeking Post,
Stewed in his haste, half breathless, painting forth
From Gonerill his Mistress, salutations;
Delivered Letters spite of intermission,
Which presently they read; on those contents
They summoned up their meiney, straight took Horse,
Commanded me to follow, and attend
The leisure of their answer, gave me cold looks,
And meeting here the other Messenger,
Whose welcome I perceived had poisoned mine,
Being the very fellow which of late
Displaid so sawcily against your Highness,
Having more man then wit about me, drew;
He raised the house, with loud and coward cries,
Your Son and Daughter found this trespass worth
The shame which here it suffers.

Winters not gone yet, if the wil'd Geese fly that way,
Fathers that wear rags, do make their Children blind,
But Fathers that bear bags, shall see their children kind.
Fortune that arrant whore, nere turns the key to the poor.
But for all this thou shall have as many Dolors for thy
Daughters, as thou can tell in a year.

Oh how this Mother swells up toward my heart!
Historica passio, down thou climing sorrow,
Thy Elements below where is this Daughter?

Wirh the Earl Sir, here within.


Follow me not, stay here.


Made you no more offense,
But what you speak of?

None:
How chance the the King comes with so small a number?

And thou had been set in the Stocks for that question, thoud'st well
deserved it


Why Fool?


We Will set thee to school to an Ant, to teach thee there is no laboring in the
winter. All that follow their noses, are led by their eyes, but blind men, and
there is not a nose among twenty, but can smell him that is stinking; let go thy
hold, when a great wheel runs down a hill, least it break thy neck with
following. But the great one that goes upward, let him draw thee after: when a
wiseman gives thee better counsel give me mine again, I would hause none but
knaves follow it, since a Fool gives it
That Sir, which serves and seeks for gain,
And follows but for form;
Will pack, when it begins to rain,
And leave thee in the storm,
But I will tarry, the Fool will stay,
And let the wiseman fly:
The knave turns Fool that runs away,
The Fool no knave perdie.

Where learned you this Fool?


Not in the Stocks Fool.


Deny to speak with me?
They are sick, they are weary,
They have trauail'd all the night? mere fetches,
The images of revolt and flying off.
Fetch me a better answer.

My dear Lord,
You know the fiery quality of the Duke,
How unremovable and fixed he is
In his own course.

Vengeance, Plague, Death, Confusion:
Fiery? What quality? Why Gloucester* Gloucester,
I Would speak with the Duke of Cornwall, and his wife.

Well my good Lord, I have informed them so.


Informed them? Do thou understand me man.


I my good Lord.


The King would speak with Cornwall,
The dear Father
Would with his Daughter speak, commands, tends, service,
Are they informed of this? My breath and blood:
Fiery? The fiery Duke, tell the hot Duke that --
No, but not yet, may be he is not well,
Infirmity does still neglect all office,
Whereto our health is bound, we are not our selves,
When Nature being oppressed, commands the mind
To suffer with the body; I Will forbear,
And am fallen out with my more headier will,
To take the indisposed and sickly fit,
For the sound man. Death on my state: wherefore
Should he sit here? This act persuades me,
That this emotion of the Duke and her
Is practice only. Give me my Servant forth;
Go tell the Duke, and's wife, Il'd speak with them:
Now, presently: bid them come forth and hear me,
Or at their Chamber door I Will beat the Drum,
Till it cry sleep to death.

I would have all well betwixt you.


Oh me my heart! My rising heart! But down.


Cry to it Nunckle, as the Cockney did to the Ecles, when she put 'em in the
Paste alive, she knapt 'em of the coxcombs with a stick, and cried down
wantons, down; 'twas her Brother, that in pure kindness to his Horse buttered
his Hay


Good morrow to you both.


Hail to your Grace.


I am glad to see your Highness.


Regan, I think your are. I know what reason
I have to think so, if thou should not be glad,
I would divorce me from thy Mother Tomb,
Sepulchring an Adultresse. O are you free?
Some other time for that. Beloved Regan,
Thy Sisters naught: oh Regan, she has tied
Sharpe-tooth'd unkindness, like a vulture here,
I can scarce speak to thee, thou wilt not believe
With how deprau'd a quality. Oh Regan.

I pray you Sir, take patience, I have hope
You less know how to value her desert,
Then she to scant her duty.

Say? How is that?


I cannot think my Sister in the least
Would fail her Obligation. If Sir perchance
She have restrained the Riots of your Followres,
It Is on such ground, and to such wholesome end,
As cleeres her from all blame.

My curses on her.


O Sir, you are old,
Nature in you stands on the very Verge
Of his confine: you should be ruled, and led
By some discretion, that discernes your state
Better then you your self: therefore I pray you,
That to our Sister, you do make return,
Say you have wronged her.

Ask her forgiveness?
Do you but mark how this becomes the house?
Dear daughter, I confess that I am old;
Age is unnecessary: on my knees I beg,
That you will vouchsafe me Raiment, Bed, and Food.

Good Sir, no more: these are unsightly tricks:
Return you to my Sister.

Never Regan:
She has abated me of half my Train;
Looked black upon me, struck me with her Tongue
Most Serpent-like, upon the very Heart.
All the stored Vengeances of Heaven, fall
On her ungrateful top: strike her young bones
You taking Airs, with Lamenesse.

Fie sir. fie.


You nimble Lightnings, dart your blinding flames
Into her scornful eyes: Infect her Beauty,
You Fen-suck'd Fogges, drawn by the powrfull Sun,
To fall, and blister.

O the blessed Gods!
So will you wish on me, when the rash mood is on.

No Regan, thou shall never have my curse:
Thy tender-hefted Nature shall not give
Thee over to harshnesse: Her eyes are fierce, but thine
Do comfort, and not burn. It Is not in thee
To grudge my pleasures, to cut off my Train,
To bandy hasty words, to scant my sizes,
And in conclusion, to oppose the bolt
Against my coming in. Thou better know
The Offices of Nature, bond of Childhood,
Effects of Courtesy, dues of Gratitude:
Thy half of the Kingdom have thou not forgot,
Wherein I thee endowed.

Good Sir, to' the purpose.


Who put my^ an in the Stocks?


What Trumpet's that?


I know it, my Sisters: this approues her Letter,
That she would soon be here. Is your Lady come?

This is a Slave, whose easy borrowed pride
Dwells in the fickly grace of her he follows.
Out Varlet, from my sight.

What means your Grace?


Who stockt my Servant? Regan, I have good hope
Thou did not know on it.
Who comes here? O Heavens!
If you do love old men; if your sweet sway
Allow Obedience; if you your selves are old,
Make it your cause: Send down, and take my part.
Art not ashamed to look upon this Beard?
O Regan, will you take her by the hand?

Why not by' the hand Sir? How have I offended?
All Is not offense that indiscretion finds,
And dotage terms so.

O sides, you are too tough!
Will you yet hold?
How came my man in the Stocks?

I set him there, Sir: but his own Disorders
Deserved much less advancement.

You? Did you?


I pray you Father being weak, seem so.
If till the expiration of your Month
You will return and soiourne with my Sister,
Dismissing half your train, come then to me,
I am now from home, and out of that provision
Which shall be needful for your entertainment.

Return to her? and fifty men dismissed?
No, rather I abjure all roofes, and choose
To wage against the enmity oth' air,
To be a Comrade with the Wolf, and Owl,
Necessities sharp pinch. Return with her?
Why the hot-bloodied France, that dowerlesse took
Our youngest borne, I could as well be brought
To knee his Throne, and Squire-like pension beg,
To keep base life a foot; return with her?
Persuade me rather to be slave and sumpter
To this detested groom.

At your choice Sir.


I prithee Daughter do not make me mad,
I will not trouble thee my Child: farewell:
We Will no more meet, no more see one another.
But yet thou art my flesh, my blood, my Daughter,
Or rather a disease that is in my flesh,
Which I must needs call mine. Thou art a Byle,
A plague sore, or imbossed Carbuncle
In my corrupted blood. But I Will not chide thee,
Let shame come when it will, I do not call it,
I do not bid the Thunder-bearer shoore,
Nor tell tales of thee to high-iudging Jove,
Mend when thou can, be better at thy leisure,
I can be patient, I can stay with Regan,
I and my hundred Knights.

Not altogether so,
I looked not for you yet, nor am provided
For your fit welcome, give ear Sir to my Sister,
For those that mingle reason with your passion,
Must be content to think you old, and so,
But she knows what she does.

Is this well spoken?


I dare avouch it Sir, what fifty Followers?
Is it not well? What should you need of more?
Yea, or so many? Since that both charge and danger,
Speak against so great a number? How in one house
Should many people, under two commands
Hold amity? It Is hard, almost impossible.

Why might not you my Lord, receive attendance
From those that she calls Servants, or from mine?

Why not my Lord?
If then they chanced to slack ye,
We could comptroll them; if you will come to me,
(For now I spi^ danger) I entreat you
To bring but five and twenty, to no more
Will I give place or notice.

I gave you all.


And in good time you gave it.


Made you my Guardians, my Depositaries,
But kept a reservation to be followed
With such a number? What, must I come to you
With five and twenty? Regan, said you so?

And speak't again my Lord, no more with me.


Those wicked Creatures yet do look well fauor'd
When others are more wicked, not being the worst
Stands in some rank of praise, I Will go with thee,
Thy fifty yet does double five and twenty,
And thou art twice her Love.

Hear me my Lord;
What need you five and twenty? Ten? Or five?
To follow in a house, where twice so many
Have a command to tend you?

What need one?


O reason not the need: our basest Beggars
Are in the poorest thing superfluous,
Allow not Nature, more then Nature needs:
Man's life is cheap as Beasts. Thou art a Lady;
If only to go warm were gorgeous,
Why Nature needs not what thou gorgeous wear'st,
Which scarcely keeps thee warm, but for true need:
You Heavens, give me that patience, patience I need,
You see me here (you Gods) a poor old man,
As full of grief as age, wretched in both,
If it be you that stirs these Daughters hearts
Against their Father, fool me not so much,
To bear it tamely: touch me with Noble anger,
And let not women's weapons, water drops,
Stain my man's cheeks. No you unnatural Hags,
I will have such reuenges on you both,
That all the world shall -- I will do such things,
What they are yet, I know not, but they shall be
The terrors of the earth? you think I Will weep,
No, I Will not weep, I have full cause of weeping.
But this heart shall break into a hundred thousand flawes
Or ere I Will weep: O Fool, I shall go mad.

Let us withdraw, 'twill be a Storm.


This house is little, the old man an'ds people,
Cannot be well bestowed.

It Is his own blame has put himself from rest,
And must needs taste his folly.

For his particular, I Will receive him gladly,
But not one follower.

So am I purposed,
Where is my Lord of Gloucester?

Followed the old man forth, he is returned.


The King is in high rage.


Whether is he going?


He calls to Horse, but will I know not whether.


It Is best to give him way, he leads himself.


My Lord, entreat him by no means to stay.


Alack the night comes on, and the high winds
Do sorely ruffle, for many Miles about
There Is scarce a Bush.

O Sir, to wilful men,
The injuries that they themselves procure,
Must be their Schoolmasters: shut up your doors,
He is attended with a desperate train,
And what they may incense him too, being apt,
To have his ear abused, wisdom bids fear.

Shut up your ^ores my Lord, it is a wil'd night,
My Regan counsels well^: come out oth' storm.

Who Is there besides foul weather?


One minded like the weather, most unquietly.


I know you: Where Is the King?


Contending with the fretfull Elements;
Bids the wind blow the Earth into the Sea,
Or swell the curled Waters above the Maine,
That things might change, or cease.

But who is with him?


None but the Fool, who labors to out-iest
His heart-strooke injuries.

Sir, I do know you,
And dare upon the warrant of my note
Commend a dear thing to you. There is division
(Although as yet the face of it is covered
With mutual cunning) 'twixt Albany, and Cornwall:
Who have, as who have not, that their great Stars
Throned and set high; Servants, who seem no less,
Which are to France the Spies and Speculations
Intelligent of our State. What has bin seen,
Either in snuffes, and packings of the Dukes,
Or the hard Reine which both of them has borne
Against the old kind King; or something deeper,
Whereof (perchance) these are but furnishings.

I will talk further with you.


No, do not:
For confirmation that I am much more
Then my out-wall; open this Purse, and take
What it contains. If you shall see Cordel^a,
(As fear not but you shall) show her this Ring,
And she will tell you who that Fellow is
That yet you do not know. Fie on this Storm,
I will go seek the King.

Give me your hand,
Have you no more to say?

Few words, but to effect more then all yet;
That when we have found the King, in which your pain
That way, I Will this: He that first lights on him,
Holla the other.

Blow winds, and crack your cheeks; Rage, blow
You Cataracts, and Hyrricano's spout,
Till you have drenched our Steeples, drown the Cocks.
You Sulfurous and Thought-executing Fires,
Vaunt-curriors of Oake-cleauing Thunderbolts,
Sindge my white head. And thou all-shaking Thunder,
Strike flat the thick Rotundity of the world,
Crack Natures moulds, all germans spill at once
That makes ungrateful Man.

O Nunkle, Court holy water in a dry house, is better then this Rainwater out
of door. Good Nunkle, in, ask thy Daughters blessing, here is a night pitties
neither Wisemen, nor Fools


Rumble thy belly full: spit Fire, spowt Rain:
Nor Rain, Wind, Thunder, Fire are my Daughters;
I tax not you, you Elements with unkindness.
I never gave you Kingdom, called you Children;
You owe me no subscription. Then let fall
Your horrible pleasure. Here I stand your Slave,
A poor, infirm, weak, and dispis'd old man:
But yet I call you Servile Ministers,
That will with two pernicious Daughters join
Your high-engender'd Battles, against a head
So old, and white as this. O, ho! it is foul.

He that has a house to put's head in, has a good Head-peece:
The Codpiece that will house, before the head has any;
The Head, and he shall Lowse: so Beggars marry many.
The man yt makes his Toe, what he his Heart should make,
Shall of a Corn cry woe, and turn his sleep to wake.
For there was never yet fair woman, but she made mouths in a glass.

No, I will be the pattern of all patience,
I will say nothing.

Who Is there?


Marry here is Grace, and a Codpiece, that is a Wiseman, and a Fool.


Alas Sir are you here? Things that love night,
Love not such nights as these: The wrathful Skies
Gallow the very wanderers of the dark
And make them keep their Caves: Since I was man,
Such sheets of Fire, such bursts of horrid Thunder,
Such groans of roaring Wind, and Rain, I never
Remember to have heard. Man's Nature cannot carry
The affliction, nor the fear.

Let the great Gods
That keep this dreadful pudder over our heads,
Find out their enemies now. Tremble thou Wretch,
That have within thee vndivulged Crimes
Vnwhipt of Justice. Hide thee, thou Bloody hand;
Thou Perjured, and thou Simular of Virtue
That art Incestuous. Caytiffe, to pieces shake
That under covert, and convenient seeming
Has practiced on man's life. Close pent-vp guilts,
Riue your concealing Continents, and cry
These dreadful Summoners grace. I am a man,
More sinned against, then sinning.

Alack, bare-headed?
Gracious my Lord, hard by here is a Houell,
Some friendship will it lend you against the Tempest:
Repose you there, while I to this hard house,
(More harder then the stones whereof it is raised,
Which even but now, demanding after you,
Denied me to come in) return, and force
Their scanted courtesy.

My wits begin to turn.
Come on my boy. How do my boy? Art cold?
I am cold my self. Where is this straw, my Fellow?
The Art of our Necessities is strange,
And can make vilde things precious. Come, your Houel;
Poor Fool, and Knave, I have one part in my heart
That Is sorry yet for thee.

He that has and a little-tyne wit,
With heigh-ho, the Wind and the Rain,
Must make content with his Fort ^es fit,
Though the Rain it raineth every day.

True Boy: Come bring us to this Houell.


This is a brave night to cool a Curtizan:
I Will speak a Prophecy ere I go:
When Priests are more in word, then matter;
When Brewers mar their Malt with water;
When Nobles are their Tailors Tutors,
No Heretics burned, but wenches Suitors;
When every Case in Law, is right;
No Squire in debt, nor no poor Knight;
When Slanders do not live in Tongues;
Nor Cut-purses come not to throngs;
When Usurers tell their Gold in the Field,
And Baudes, and whores, do Churches build,
Then shall the Realm of Albion, come to great confusion:
Then comes the time, who lives to see it,
That going shall be used with feet.
This prophecy Merlin shall make, for I live before his time.

Alack, alack Edmund, I like not this unnatural dealing; when I desired
their leave that I might pity him, they took from me the use of mine own
house, charged me on pain of perpetual displeasure, neither to spea^e of him
entreat for him, or any way sustain him


Most savage and unnatural.


Go too; say you nothing. There is division between the Dukes, and a worsse
matter then that: I have received a Letter this night, it is dangerous to be
spoken, I have locked the Letter in my Closset, these injuries the King now
bears, will be revenged home; there is part of a Power already footed, we must
incline to the King, I will look him, and privily relieve him; go you and
maintain talk with the Duke, that my charity be not of him perceived; If he
ask for me, I am ill, and gone to bed, if I die for it, (as no less is
threatened me) the King my old Master must be relieved. There is strange things
toward Edmund, pray you be careful


This Courtesy forbid thee, shall the Duke
Instantly know, and of that Letter too;
This seems a fair deserving, and must draw me.
That which my Father looses: no less then all,
The younger rises, when the old does fall.

Here is the place my Lord, good my Lord enter,
The tirrany of the open night's too rough
For Nature to endure.

Let me alone.


Good my Lord enter here.


Wilt break my heart?


I had rather break mine own,
Good my Lord enter.

Thou think it is much that this contentious storm
Inuades us to the skinso: it is to thee,
But where the greater malady is fixed,
The lesser is scarce felt. Thou Would shun a Bear,
But if they flight lay toward the roaring Sea,
Thou Would meet the Bear in the mouth, when the mind's free,
The bodies delicate: the tempest in my mind,
Does from my senses take all feeling else,
Save what beats there, Filliall ingratitude,
Is it not as this mouth should tear this hand
For lifting food to it? But I will punish home;
No, I will weep no more; in such a night,
To shut me out? Pour on, I will endure:
In such a night as this? O Regan, Gonerill,
Your old kind Father, whose frank heart gave all,
O that way madness lies, let me shun that:
No more of that.

Good my Lord enter here.


Prithee go in thy self, seek thine own ease,
This tempest will not give me leave to ponder
On things would hurt me more, but I Will go in,
In Boy, go first. You houselesse poverty,
Nay get thee in; I Will pray, and then I Will sleep.
Poor naked wretches, where so ere you are
That bide the pelting of this pitiless storm,
How shall your House-lesse heads, and unfed sides,
Your lop'd, and window'd raggedness defend you
From seasons such as these? O I have taken
Too little care of this: Take Physic, Pomp,
Expose thy self to feel what wretches feel,
That thou may shake the superflux to them,
And show the Heavens more just.

Fathom, and half, Fathom and half; poor Tom.


Come not in here Nuncle, here is a spirit, help me, help me.


Give me thy hand, who is there?


A spirit, a spirit, he says his name's poor Tom.


What art thou that do grumble there in the straw? Come forth.


Away, the foul Fiend follows me, through the sharp Hauthorne blow the
winds. Humh, go to thy bed and warm thee


Did thou give all to thy Daughters? And art thou come to this?


Who gives any thing to poor Tom? Whom the foul fiend has led though Fire,
and through Flame, through Sword, and Whirle-Poole, over Bog, and Quagmire,
that has laid Knives under his Pillow, and Halters in his Pue, set Rats-bane
by his Porredge, made him Proud of heart, to ride on a Bay trotting Horse, over
four incht Bridges, to course his own shadow for a Traitor. Bliss thy five
Wits, Toms a cold. O do, de, do, de, do de, bliss thee from Whirle-Windes,
Starre-blasting, and taking, do poor Tom some charity, whom the foul Fiend
vexes. There could I have him now, and there, and there again, and there


Has his Daughters brought him to this pass?
Could thou save nothing? Would thou give 'em all?

Nay, he reserved a Blanket, else we had bin all shamed.


Now all the plagues that in the pendulous air
Hang fated over men's faults, light on thy Daughters.

He has no Daughters Sir.


Death Traitor, nothing could have subdued Nature
To such a lowness, but his unkind Daughters.
Is it the fashion, that discarded Fathers,
Should have thus little mercy on their flesh:
Judicious punishment, 'twas this flesh begot
Those Pelicane Daughters.

Pillicock sat on Pillicock hill, allow: allow, loo, loo.


This cold night will turn us all to Fools, and Madmen.


Take heed of the fool Fiend, obey thy Parents, keep thy words Justice,
swear not, commit not, with man's sworn Spouse: set not thy Sweetheart on
proud array. Tom^s a cold


What have thou bin?


A Seruingman? Proud in heart, and mind; that curled my hair, wore Gloves in
my cap; served the Lust of my Mistress heart, and did the act of darkness
with her. Swore as many Oaths as I spoke words, and broke them in the sweet
face of Heaven. One, that slept in the contriuing of Lust, and waked to do it.
Wine loved I dearly, Dice dearly; and in Woman, out-Paramour'd the Turk.
False of heart, light of ear, bloody of hand; Hog in sloth, Fox in stealth,
Wolf in greediness, Dog in madness, Lion in prey. Let not the creaking of
shoes, Nor the rustling of Silks, betray thy poor heart to woman. Keep thy
foot out of Brothels, thy hand out of Plackets, thy pen from Lenders Books,
and defye the foul Fiend. Still through the Hauthorne blows the cold wind:
Says suum, mun, nonny, Dolphin my Boy, Boy Sesey: let him trot by


Thou were better in a Grave, then to answer with thy vncouer'd body, this
extremity of the Skies. Is man no more then this? Consider him well. Thou
ow'st the Worm no Silk; the Beast, no Hide; the Sheep, no Wool; the Cat, no
perfume. Ha? Here Is three on's are sophisticated. Thou art the thing it self;
vnaccommodated man* is no more but such a poor, bare, forked Animal as thou
art. Off, off you Lendings: Come, vnbutton here


Prithee Nunckle be contented, it is a naughty night to swim in. Now a little
fire in a wild Field, were like an old Letchers heart, a small spark, all the
rest on's body, cold: Look, here comes a walking fire


This is the foul Flibbertigibbet; he begins at Curfew, and walks at first
Cock: He gives the Web and the Pin, squints the eye, and makes the
Hare-lippe; Mildewes the white Wheat, and hurts the poor Creature of earth
Swithold footed thrice the old,
He met the Nightmare, and her nine-fold;
Bid her a-light, and her troth-plight,
And aroynt thee Witch, aroynt thee.

How fares your Grace?


What Is he?


Who Is there? What is it you seek?


What are you there? Your Names?


Poor Tom, that eats the swimming Frog, the Toad, the Tod-pole, the
wall-Neut, and the water: that in the fury of his heart, when the foul Fiend
rages, eats Cow Dung for Sallets; swallows the old Rat, and the ditch-Dogge;
drinks the green Mantle of the standing Poole: who is whipped from Tything to
Tything, and stockt, punished, and imprisoned: who has three Suites to his
back, six shirts to his body
Horse to ride, and weapon to wear:
But Mice, and Rats, and such small Dear,
Have bin Toms food, for seven long year:
Beware my Follower. Peace Smulkin, peace thou Fiend.

What, has your Grace no better company?


The Prince of Darkness is a Gentleman. Modo he is called, and Mahu.


Our flesh and blood, my Lord, is grown so vilde, that it does hate what gets
it


Poor Tom's a cold.


Go in with me; my duty cannot suffer
TO obey in all your daughters hard commands:
Though their Iniunction be to bar my doors,
And let this Tyrannous night take hold upon you,
Yet have I ventured to come seek you out,
And bring you where both fire, and food is ready.

First let me talk with this Philosopher,
What is the cause of Thunder?

Good my Lord take his offer,
Go into the house.

I Will talk a word with this same learned Theban:
What is your study?

How to prevent the Fiend, and to kill Vermin.


Let me ask you one word in private.


Importune him once more to go my Lord,
His wits begin to unsettle.

Can thou blame him?
His Daughters seek his death: Ah, that good Kent,
He said it would be thus: poor banished man:
Thou say the King grows mad, I Will tell thee Friend
I am almost mad my self. I had a Son,
Now out-lawed from my blood: he sought my life
But lately: very late: I loved him (Friend)
No Father his Son deerer: true to tell thee,
The grief has crazed my wits. What a night's this?
I do beseech your grace.

O cry you mercy, Sir:
Noble Philosopher, your company.

Tom's a cold.


In fellow there, into the Houel; keep thee warm.


Come, let us in all.


This way, my Lord.


With him;
I will keep still with my Philosopher.

Good my Lord, sooth him:
Let him take the Fellow.

Take him you on.


Sir, come on: go along with us.


Come, good Athenian.


No words, no words, hush.


Child Rowland to the dark Tower came,
His word was still, fie, foh, and fumme,
I smell the blood of a British man.

I will have my revenge, ere I depart his house.


How my Lord, I may be censured, that Nature thus gives way to Loyalty,
something fears me to think of


I now perceive, it was not altogether your Brothers evil disposition made him
seek his death: but a provoking merit set a-worke by a reprouable badnesse in
himself


How malicious is my fortune, that I must repent to be just? This is the Letter
which he spoake of; which approues him an intelligent party to the advantages
of France. O Heavens! that this Treason were not; or not I the detector


Go with me to the Duchess.


If the matter of this Paper be certain, you have mighty business in hand.


True or false, it has made thee Earl of Gloucester: seek out where thy
Father is, that he may be ready for our apprehension


If I find him comforting the King, it will stuff his suspicion more fully. I
will persevere in my course of Loyalty, though the conflict be sore between
that, and my blood


I will lay trust upon thee: and thou shall find a dear Father in my love.


Here is better then the open air* take it thankfully: I will piece out the
comfort with what addition I can: I will not be long from you


All the power of his wits, have given way to his impatience: the Gods reward
your kindness


Fraterretto calls me, and tells me Nero is an Angler in the Lake of Darkness:
pray Innocent, and beware the foul Fiend


Prithee Nunkle tell me, whether a madman be a Gentleman, or a Yeoman.


A King, a King.


No, he is a Yeoman, that has a Gentleman to his Son: for he is a mad Yeoman
that sees his Son a Gentleman before him


To have a thousand with red burning spits
Come hizzing in upon 'em.

Bless thy five wits.


O pity: Sir, where is the patience now
That you so often have boasted to retain?

My tears begin to take his part so much,
They mar my counterfetting.

The little dogs, and all;
Trey, Blanch, and Sweetheart: see, they bark at me.

Tom, will throw his head at them: Auaunt you
Curres, be thy mouth or black or white:
Tooth that poisons if it bite:
Mastiffe, Greyhound, Mongrill, Grim,
Hound or Spaniell, Brache, or Him:
Or Bobtaile tight, or Troudle tail,
Tom will make him weep and wail,
For with throwing thus my head;
Dogs leapt the hatch, and all are fled.
Do, de, de, de: sese: Come, march to Wakes and Fayres,
And Market Towns: poor Tom thy horn is dry,

Then let them Anatomize Regan: See what breeds about her heart. Is there any
cause in Nature that make these hard-hearts. You sir, I entertain for one of
my hundred; only, I do not like the fashion of your garments. You will say they
are Persian; but let them be changed


Now good my Lord, lie here, and rest awhile.


Make no noise, make no noise, draw the Curtains: so, so, we will go to Supper
in the morning


And I Will go to bed at noone.


Come hither Friend:
Where is the King my Master?

Here Sir, but trouble him not, his wits are gone.


Good friend, I prithee take him in thy arms;
I have ore-heard a plot of death upon him:
There is a Litter ready, lay him in it,
And drive toward Dover friend, where thou shall meet
Both welcome, and protection. Take up thy Master,
If thou should dally half an hour, his life
With thine, and all that offer to defend him,
Stand in assured loss. Take up, take up,
And follow me, that will to some provision
Give thee quick conduct. Come, come, away.

Post speedily to my Lord your husband, show him this Letter, the Army of
France is landed: seek out the Traitor Glouster


Hang him instantly.


Pluck out his eyes.


Leave him to my displeasure. Edmond, keep you our Sister company: the
reuenges we are bound to take upon your Traitorous Father, are not fit for
your beholding. Advice the Duke where you are going, to a most festiuate
preparation: we are bound to the like. Our Posts shall be swift, and
intelligent betwixt us. Farewell dear Sister, farewell my Lord of Glouster

How now? Where Is the King?


My Lord of Glouster has conuey'd him hence
Some five or six and thirty of his Knights
Hot Questrists after him, met him at gate,
Who, with some other of the Lords, dependants,
Are gone with him toward Dover; where they boast
To have well armed Friends.

Get horses for your Mistress.


Farewell sweet Lord, and Sister.


Edmund farewell: go seek the Traitor Gloucester,
Pinnion him like a Thief, bring him before us:
Though well we may not pass upon his life
Without the form of Justice: yet our power
Shall do a curt'sie to our wrath, which men
May blame, but not comptroll.
Who Is there? the Traitor?

Ungrateful Fox, it is he.


Bind fast his corky arms.


What means your Graces?
Good my Friends consider you are my Ghests:
Do me no foul play, Friends.

Bind him I say.


Hard, hard: O filthy Traitor.


Unmerciful Lady, as you are, I Am none.


To this Chair bind him,
Villain, thou shall find.

By the kind Gods, it is most ignobly done
To pluck me by the Beard.

So white, and such a Traitor?


Naughty Lady,
These hairs which thou do ravish from my chin
Will quicken and accuse thee. I am your Host,
With Robbers hands, my hospitable favors
You should not ruffle thus. What will you do?

Come Sir.
What Letters had you late from France?

Be simple answered, for we know the truth.


And what confederacy have you with the Traitors, late footed in the Kingdom?


To whose hands
You have sent the Lunaticke King: Speak.

I have a Letter guessingly set down
Which came from one that is of a newtrall heart,
And not from one opposed.

Cunning.


And false.


Where have thou sent the King?


To Dover.


Wherefore to Dover?
Was It thou not charged at peril.

Wherefore to Dover? Let him answer that.


I am tied to' the Stake,
And I must stand the Course.

Wherefore to Dover?


Because I would not see thy cruel Nails
Pluck out his poor old eyes: nor thy fierce Sister,
In his Anointed flesh, stick boarish phangs.
The Sea, with such a storm as his bare head,
In Hell-blacke-night endured, would have buoyed up
And quenched the Stelled fires:
Yet poor old heart, he help the Heavens to rain.
If Wolves had at thy Gate howled that stern time,
Thou should have said, good Porter turn the Key:
All Cruels else subscribe: but I shall see
The winged Vengeance overtake such Children.

See It shall thou never. Fellows hold ye Chair,
Upon these eyes of thine, I Will set my foot.

He that will think to live, till he be old,
Give me some help. -- O cruel! O you Gods.

One side will mock another: The other too.


If you see vengeance.


Hold your hand, my Lord:
I have served you ever since I was a Child:
But better service have I never done you,
Then now to bid you hold.

How now, you dog?


If you did wear a beard upon your chin,
I Would shake it on this quarrel. What do you mean?

My Villain?


Nay then come on, and take the chance of anger.


Give me thy Sword. A pezant stand up thus?


Oh I am slain: my Lord, you have one eye left
To see some mischefe on him* Oh.

Lest it see more, prevent it; Out vilde gelly:
Where is thy luster now?

All dark and comfortless?
Where Is my Son Edmund?
Edmund, enkindle all the sparks of Nature
To quit this horrid act.

Out treacherous Villain,
Thou call'st on him, that hates thee. It was be
That made the ouerture of thy Treasons to us:
Who is too good to pity thee.

O my Follies! then Edgar was abused,
Kind Gods, forgive me that, and prosper him.

Go thrust him out at gates, and let him smell
His way to Dover.
How is it my Lord? How look you?

I have received a hurt: Follow me Lady;
Turn out that eyelesse Villain: throw this Slave
Upon the Dunghill: Regan, I bleed apace,
Untimely comes this hurt. Give me your arm.

Yet better thus, and known to be contemned,
Then still contemned and flattered, to be worst:
The lowest, and most dejected thing of Fortune,
Stands still in esperance, lives not in fear:
The lamentable change is from the best,
The worst returns to laughter. Welcome then,
Thou vnsubstantiall air that I embrace:
The Wretch that thou have blown unto the worst,
Owes nothing to thy blasts.
But who comes here? My Father poorly led?
World, World, O world!
But that thy strange mutations make us hate thee,
Life would not yield to age.

O my good Lord, I have been your Tenant,
And your Fathers Tenant, these fourscore years.

Away, get thee away: good Friend be gone,
Thy comforts can do me no good at all,
Thee, they may hurt.

You cannot see your way.


I have no way, and therefore want no eyes:
I stumbled when I saw. Full often it is seen,
Our means secure us, and our mere defects
Prove our Commodities. Oh dear Son Edgar,
The food of thy abused Fathers wrath:
Might I but live to see thee in my touch,
I Would say I had eyes again.

How now? who is there?


O Gods! Who is it can say I am at the worst?
I am worse then ere I was.

It Is poor mad Tom.


And worse I may be yet: the worst is not,
So long as we can say this is the worst.

Fellow, where go?


Is it a Beggar-man?


Madman, and beggar too.


He has some reason, else he could not beg.
IN the last nights storm, I such a fellow saw;
Which made me think a Man, a Worm. My Son
Came then into my mind, and yet my mind
Was then scarce Friends with him.
I have heard more since:
As Flies to wanton Boys, are we to the Gods,
They kill us for their sport.

How should this be?
Bad is the Trade that must play Fool to sorrow,
Ang'ring it self, and others. Bless thee Master.

Is that the naked Fellow?


I, my Lord.


Get thee away: If for my sake
Thou will ore-take us hence a mile or twain
IN the way toward Dover, do it for ancient love,
And bring some covering for this naked Soul,
Which I Will entreat to lead me.

Alack sir, he is mad.


It Is the times plague,
When Madmen lead the blind:
Do as I bid thee, or rather do thy pleasure:
Above the rest, be gone.

He bring him the best Parrell that I have
Come on it, what will.

Sirrah, naked fellow.


Poor Tom's a cold. I cannot daub it further.


Come hither fellow.


And yet I must:
Bless thy sweet eyes, they bleed.

Know thou the way to Dover?


Both style, and gate; Horseway, and foot-path: poor Tom has bin scarr'd out
of his good wits. Bless thee good man's son, from the foul Fiend


Here take this purse, you whom the heavens plagues
Have humbled to all strokes: that I am wretched
Makes thee the happier: Heavens deal so still:
Let the superfluous, and Lust-dieted man,
That slaves your ordinance, that will not see
Because he does not feel, feel your power quickly:
So distribution should undo excess,
And each man have enough. Do thou know Dover?

I Master.


There is a Cliffe, whose high and bending head
Looks fearfully in the confined Deep:
Bring me but to the very brimme of it,
And I Will repair the misery thou do bear
With something rich about me: from that place,
I shall no leading need.

Give me thy arm;
Poor Tom shall lead thee.

Welcome my Lord. I meruell our mild husband
Not met us on the way. Now, where is your Master?

Madam within, but never man so changed:
I told him of the Army that was Landed:
He smiled at it. I told him you were coming,
His answer was, the worse. Of Glosters Treachery,
And of the loyal Service of his Son
When I informed him, then he called me Sot,
And told me I had turned the wrong side out:
What most he should dislike, seems pleasant to him;
What like, offensive.

Then shall you go no further.
It is the Cowish terror of his spirit
That dares not undertake: He Will not feel wrongs
Which tie him to an answer: our wishes on the way
May prove effects. Back Edmond to my Brother,
Hasten his Musters, and conduct his powers.
I must change names at home, and give the Distaffe
Into my Husbands hands. This trusty Servant
Shall pass between us: ere long you are like to hear
(If you dare venture in your own behalf)
A Mistresses command. Wear this; spare speech,
Decline your head. This kiss, if it durst speak
Would stretch thy Spirits up into the air:
Conceive, and fare thee well.

Yours in the ranks of death.


My most dear Gloucester.
Oh, the difference of man, and man,
To thee a Woman's services are due,
My Fool usurps my body.

Madam, here come's my Lord.


I have been worth the whistle.


Oh Gonerill,
You are not worth the dust which the rude wind
Blows in your face.

Milke-Liuer'd man,
That bear a cheek for blows, a head for wrongs,
Who have not in thy brows an eye-discerning
Thine Honor, from thy suffering.

See thy self devil:
Proper deformity seems not in the Fiend
So horrid as in woman.

Oh vain Fool.


Oh my good Lord, the Duke of Cornwals dead,
Slain by his Servant, going to put out
The other eye of Glouster.

Glousters eyes.


A Servant that he bred, thrilled with remorse,
Opposed against the act: bending his Sword
To his great Master, who, threat-enrag'd
Flew on him, and among'st them felled him dead,
But not without that harmefull stroke, which since
Has plucked him after.

This shows you are above
You Justices, that these our nether crimes
So speedily can venge. But (O poor Glouster)
Lost he his other eye?

Both, both, my Lord.
This Leter Madam, craves a speedy answer:
It Is from your Sister.

One way I like this well.
But being widow, and my Glouster with her,
May all the building in my fancy pluck
Upon my hateful life. Another way
The News is not so tart. I Will read, and answer.

Where was his Son,
When they did take his eyes?

Come with my Lady hither.


He is not here.


No my good Lord, I met him back again.


Knows he the wickedness?


I my good Lord: 'twas he informed against him
And quit the house on purpose, that their punishment
Might have the freer course.

Glouster, I live
To thank thee for the love thou shew'dst the King,
And to revenge thine eyes. Come hither Friend,
Tell me what more thou know.

Alack, it is he: why he was met even now
As mad as the vexed Sea, singing alowd,
Crowned with rank Fenitar, and furrow weeds,
With Hardokes, Hemlocke, Nettles, Cuckoo flowers,
Darnell, and all the idle weeds that grow
In our sustaining Corn. A Centery send forth;
Search every Acre in the high-growne field,
And bring him to our eye. What can man's wisdom
In the restoring his bereaved Sense; he that helps him,
Take all my outward worth.

There is means Madam:
Our foster Nurse of Nature, is repose,
The which he lackes: that to provoke in him
Are many Simples operative, whose power
Will close the eye of Anguish.

All blessed Secrets,
All you vnpublish'd Virtues of the earth
Spring with my tears; be aydant, and remediate
In the Goodmans desires: seek, seek for him,
Least his vngouern'd rage, dissolve the life
That wants the means to lead it.

News Madam,
The British Powers are marching hitherward.

It Is known before. Our preparation stands
In expectation of them. O dear Father,
It is thy business that I go about: Therefore great France
My mourning, and importuned tears has pitied:
No blown Ambition does our Arms incite,
But love, dear love, and our aged Fathers Rite:
Soon may I hear, and see him.

But are my Brothers Powers set forth?


I Madam*


Himself in person there?


Madam with much ado:
Your Sister is the better Soldier.

Lord Edmund spoke not with your Lord at home?


No Madam.


What night import my Sisters Letter to him?


I know not, Lady.


Faith he is poasted hence on serious matter:
It was great ignorance, Glousters eyes being out
To let him live. Where he arriues, he moves
All hearts against us: Edmund, I think is gone
In pity of his misery, to dispatch
His nighted life: Moreover to descry
The strength of the Enemy.

I must needs after him, Madam, with my Letter.


Our troops set forth to morrow, stay with us:
The ways are dangerous.

I may not Madam:
My Lady charged my duty in this business.

Why should she write to Edmund?
Might not you transport her purposes by word? Belike,
Some things, I know not what. I Will love thee much
Let me unseal the Letter.

Madam, I had rather --


I know your Lady does not love her Husband,
I am sure of that: and at her late being here,
She gave strange Eliads, and most speaking looks
To Noble Edmund. I know you are of her bosom.

I, Madam?


I speak in understanding: Y' are: I know it,
Therefore I do advise you take this note:
My Lord is dead: Edmond, and I have talked,
And more convenient is he for my hand
Then for your Ladies: You may gather more:
If you do find him, pray you give him this;
And when your Mistress hears thus much from you,
I pray desire her call her wisdom to her.
So fare you well:
If you do chance to hear of that blind Traitor,
Preferment falls on him, that cuts him off.

Would I could meet Madam, I should show
What party I do follow.

Fare thee well.


When shall I come to the top of that same hill?


You do climb up it now. Look how we labor.


Me thinks the ground is eeuen.


Horrible steep.
Hark, do you hear the Sea?

No truly.


Why then your other Senses grow imperfect
By your eyes anguish.

So may it be indeed.
Me thinks thy voice is altered, and thou speak
In better phrase, and matter then thou did.

Y' are much deceived: In nothing am I changed
But in my Garments.

Me thinks y' are better spoken.


Come on Sir,
Here Is the place: stand still: how fearful
And dizie it is, to cast ones eyes so low,
The Crows and Choughes, that wing the midway air
Show scarce so gross as Beetles. Half way down
Hangs one that gathers Sampire: dreadful Trade:
Me thinks he seems no bigger then his head.
The Fishermen, that walked upon the beach
Appear like Mice: and yond tall Anchoring Bark,
Diminished to her Cock: her Cock, a Buoy
Almost too small for sight. The murmuring Surge,
That on the unnumbered idle Pebble chafes
Cannot be heard so high. I Will look no more,
Least my brain turn, and the deficient sight
Topple down headlong.

Set me where you stand.


Give me your hand:
You are now within a foot of the extreme Verge:
For all beneath the Moon would I not leap upright.

Let go my hand:
Here Friend's another purse: in it, a Jewel
Well worth a poor man's taking. Fayries, and Gods
Prosper it with thee. Go thou further off,
Bid me farewell, and let me hear thee going.

Now fare ye well, good Sir.


With all my heart.


Why I do trifle thus with his despair,
Is done to cure it.

O you mighty Gods!
This world I do renounce, and in your sights
Shake patiently my great affliction off:
If I could bear it longer, and not fall
To quarrel with your great opposelesse wills,
My snuff, and loathed part of Nature should
Burn it self out. If Edgar live, O bless him:
Now Fellow, fare thee well.

Gone Sir, farewell:
And yet I know not how conceit may rob
The Treasury of life, when life it self
Yields to the Theft. Had he bin where he thought,
By this had thought bin past. Alive, or dead?
Hoa, you Sir: Friend, hear you Sir, speak:
Thus might he pass indeed: yet he reuiues.
What are you Sir?

Away, and let me dye.


Had thou been ought
But Gozemore, Feathers, Air,
(So many fathom down precipitating)
Thou Would shiuer'd like an Egg: but thou do breath:
Have heavy substance, bleed'st not, speak, art sound,
Ten Masts at each, make not the altitude
Which thou have perpendicularly fell,
Thy life's a Miracle. Speak yet again.

But have I fallen, or no?


From the dread Somnet of this Chalkie Bourne
Look up a height, the shrill-gorg'd Lark so far
Cannot be seen, or heard: Do but look up.

Alack, I have no eyes:
Is wretchedness deprived that benefit
To end it self by death? 'Twas yet some comfort,
When misery could beguile the Tyrants rage,
And frustrate his proud will.

Give me your arm.
Up, so: How is it? Feel you your Legs? You stand.

Too well, too well.


This is above all strangeness,
Upon the crown of the Cliffe. What thing was that
Which parted from you?

A poor unfortunate Beggar.


As I stood here below, me thought his eyes
Were two full Moons: he had a thousand Noses,
Horns wealk'd, and waued like the enraged Sea:
It was some Fiend: Therefore thou happy Father,
Think that the cleerest Gods, who make them Honors
Of men's Impossibilities, have preserved thee.

I do remember now: henceforth I Will bear
Affliction, till it do cry out it self
Enough, enough, and dye. That thing you speak of,
I took it for a man: often 'twould say
The Fiend, the Fiend, he led me to that place.

Bear free and patient thoughts.
But who comes here?
The safer sense will never accommodate
His Master thus.

No, they cannot touch me for crying. I am the King himself.


O thou side-piercing sight!


Nature's above Art, in that respect. There Is your Presse-money. That fellow
handles his bow, like a Crow-keeper: draw me a Cloathiers yard. Look, look,
a Mouse: peace, peace, this piece of toasted Cheese will do it. There Is my
Gauntlet, I Will prove it on a Giant. Bring up the brown Bills. O well flowne
Bird: in the clout, in the clout: Hewgh. Give the word


Sweet Mariorum.


Pass.


I know that voice.


Ha! Gonerill with a white beard? They flattered me like a Dog, and told me
I had the white hayres in my Beard, ere the black ones were there. To say I,
and no, to every thing that I said: I, and no too, was no good Divinity. When
the rain came to wet me once, and the wind to make me chatter: when the
Thunder would not peace at my bidding, there I found 'em, there I smelt 'em
out. Go too, they are not men of their words; they told me, I was every thing:
It Is a Lie, I am not Agu-proofe


The trick of that voice, I do well remember:
Is It not the King?

I, every inch a King.
When I do stare, see how the Subject quakes,
I pardon that man's life. What was thy cause?
Adultery? thou shall not dye: dye for Adultery?
No, the Wren goes to it, and the small gilded Fly
Does letcher in my sight. Let Copulation thrive:
For Glousters bastard Son was kinder to his Father,
Then my Daughters got 'tweene the lawful sheets.
To It Luxury pell-mell, for I lack Soldiers.
Behold yond simpring Dame, whose face between her Forkes presages Snow; that
minces Virtue, and does shake the head to hear of pleasures name. The Fitchew,
nor the soyled Horse goes to it with a more riotous appetite* Down from the
waste they are Centaures, though Women all above: but to the Girdle do the Gods
inherit, beneath is all the Fiends. There Is hell, there is darkness, there is
the sulphurous pit; burning, scalding, stench, consumption: Fie, fie, fie; pah,
pah: Give me an Ounce of Ciuet; good Apothecary sweeten my immagination:
There Is money for thee

O let me kiss that hand.


Let me wipe it first,
It smelles of Mortality.

O ruined piece of Nature, this great world
Shall so wear out to naught.
Do thou know me?

I remember thine eyes well enough: do thou squiny at me? No, do thy worst
blind Cupid, I Will not love. Read thou this challenge, mark but the penning of
it


Were all thy Letters Suns, I could not see.


I would not take this from report,
It is, and my heart breaks at it.

Read.


What with the Case of eyes?


Oh ho, are you there with me? No eyes in your head, nor no money in your purse?
Your eyes are in a heavy case, your purse in a light, yet you see how this
world goes


I see it feelingly.


What, art mad? A man may see how this world goes, with no eyes. Look with
thine ears: See how yond Justice railes upon yond simple thief. Hark in
thine ear: Change places, and handy-dandy, which is the Justice, which is the
thief: Thou have seen a Farmers dog bark at a Beggar


I Sir.


And the Creature run from the Cur: there thou might behold the great image
of Authority, a Dogg's obeyed in Office. Thou, Rascal Beadle, hold thy bloody
hand: why do thou lash that Whore? Strip thy own back, thou hotly lusts to
use her in that kind, for which thou whip'st her. The Usurer hangs the Cozener.
Thorough tattered clothes great Vices do appear: Robes, and Furred gowns
hide all. Place sins with Gold, and the strong Lance of Justice, hurtlesse
breaks: Arm it in rags, a Pigmies straw does pierce it. None does offend,
none, I say none, I Will able 'em; take that of me my Friend, who have the power
to seal the accusers lips. Get thee glasse-eyes, and like a scuruy Politician,
seem to see the things thou do not. Now, now, now, now. Pull off my Boots:
harder, harder, so


O matter, and impertinency mixed,
Reason in Madness.

If thou will weep my Fortunes, take my eyes.
I know thee well enough, thy name is Glouster:
Thou must be patient; we came crying hither:
Thou know, the first time that we smell the Air
We wawle, and cry. I will preach to thee: Mark.

Alack, alack the day.


When we are borne, we cry that we are come
To this great stage of Fools. This a good block:
It were a delicate stratagem to shoo
A Troop of Horse with Felt: I Will put't in proof,
And when I have stolen upon these Son in Laws,
Then kill, kill, kill, kill, kill, kill.

Oh here he is: lay hand upon him, Sir*
Your most dear Daughter --

No rescue? What, a Prisoner? I am even
The Natural Fool of Fortune. Use me well,
You shall have ransom. Let me have Surgeons,
I am cut to' the Brains.

You shall have any thing.


No Seconds? All my self?
Why, this would make a man, a man of Salt
To use his eyes for Garden water-pots. I will die bravely,
Like a smugge Bridegroom. What? I will be Iouiall:
Come, come, I am a King, Masters, know you that?

You are a Royal one, and we obey you.


Then there is life in it. Come, and you get it,
You shall get it by running: Sa, sa, sa, sa.

A sight most pitiful in the meanest wretch,
Past speaking of in a King. Thou have a Daughter
Who redeemes Nature from the general curse
Which twain have brought her to.

Hail gentle Sir.


Sir, speed you: what is your will?


Do you hear ought (Sir) of a Battle toward.


Most sure, and vulgar:
Every one hears that; which can distinguish sound.

But by your favor:
How neere's the other Army?

Near, and on speedy foot: the maine descry
Stands on the hourly thought.

I thank you Sir, that is all.


Though that the Queen on special cause is here
Her Army is moved on.

I thank you Sir.


You ever gentle Gods, take my breath from me,
Let not my worser Spirit tempt me again
To dye before you please.

Well pray you Father.


Now good sir, what are you?


A most poor man, made tame to Fortunes blows
Who, by the Art of known, and feeling sorrows,
Am pregnant to good pity. Give me your hand,
I Will lead you to some biding.

Hearty thanks:
The bounty, and the benizon of Heaven
To boot, and boot.

A proclaimed prize: most happy
That eyelesse head of thine, was first framed flesh
To raise my fortunes. Thou old, unhappy Traitor,
Breefely thy self remember: the Sword is out
That must destroy thee.

Now let thy friendly hand
Put strength enough to it.

Wherefore, bold Pezant,
Dare thou support a published Traitor? Hence,
Least that the infection of his fortune take
Like hold on thee. Let go his arm.

Chill not let go Zir,
Without vurther 'casion.

Let go Slave, or thou dy'st.


Good Gentleman go your gate, and let poor volke pass: and 'chud have bin
zwaggerd out of my life, 'twould not ha'bin zo long as it is, by a vortnight.
Nay, come not near the old man: keep out che vor'ye, or ice try whither your
Costard, or my Ballow be the harder; chill be plain with you


Out Dunghill.


Chill pick your teeth Zir: come, no matter vor your foynes.


Slave thou have slain me: Villain, take my purse;
If ever thou will thrive, bury my body,
And give the Letters which thou find'st about me,
To Edmund Earl of Glouster: seek him out
Upon the English party. Oh untimely death, death.

I know thee well. A serviceable Villain,
As duteous to the vices of thy Mistress,
As badnesse would desire.

What, is he dead?


Sit you down Father: rest you.
Let Us see these Pockets; the Letters that he speaks of
May be my Friends: he is dead; I am only sorry
He had no other Deathsman. Let us see:
Leave gentle wax, and manners: blame us not
To know our enemies minds, we rip their hearts,
Their Papers is more lawful.
LEt our reciprocal vows be remembered. You have many opportunities to cut
him off: if your will want not, time and place will be fruitfully offered.
There is nothing done. If he return the Conqueror, then am I the Prisoner,
and his bed, my Jail, from the loathed warmth whereof, deliver me, and supply
the place for your Labor.

Your (Wife, so I would say) affectionate Servant. Gonerill.



Oh indinguish'd space of Woman's will,
A plot upon her virtuous Husbands life,
And the exchange my Brother: here, in the sands
Thee I Will rake up, the post unsanctified
Of murtherous Letchers: and in the mature time,
With this ungracious paper strike the sight
Of the death-practis'd Duke: for him it is well,
That of thy death, and business, I can tell.

The King is mad:
How stiff is my vilde sense
That I stand up, and have ingenious feeling
Of my huge Sorrows? Better I were distract,
So should my thoughts be seuer'd from my greefes,
And woes, by wrong imaginations loose
The knowledge of themselves.

Give me your hand:
Far off methinkes I hear the beaten Drum.
Come Father, I Will bestow you with a Friend.

O thou good Kent,
How shall I live and work
To match thy goodness?
My life will be too short,
And every measure fail me.

To be acknowledged Madam is ore-pai'd,
All my reports go with the modest truth,
Nor more, nor clipped, but so.

Be better suited,
These weeds are memories of those worser hours:
I prithee put them off.

Pardon dear Madam,
Yet to be known shortens my made intent,
My boon I make it, that you know me not,
Till time, and I, think meet.

Then be it so my good Lord:
How does the King?

Madam sleeps still.


O you kind Gods!
Cure this great breach in his abused Nature,
The untuned and iarring senses, O wind up,
Of this childe-changed Father.

So please your Majesty,
That we may wake the King, he has slept long?

Be governed by your knowledge, and proceed
IN the sway of your own will: is he arrayed?

I Madam: in the heaviness of sleep,
We put fresh garments on him.
Be by good Madam when we do awake him,
I doubt of his Temperance.

O my dear Father, restauratian hang
Thy medicine on my lips, and let this kiss
Repair those violent harms, that my two Sisters
Have in thy Reverence made.

Kind and dear Princess.


Had you not bin their Father, these white fl^kes
Did challenge pity of them. Was this a face
To be opposed against the iarring winds?
Mine Enemies dog, though he had bit me,
Should have stood that night against my fire,
And was it thou feign (poor Father)
To houell thee with Swine and Rogues forlorn,
In short, and musty straw? Alack, alack,
It Is wonder that thy life and wits, at once
Had not concluded all. He wakes, speak to him.

Madam do you, it is fittest.


How does my Royal Lord?
How fares your Majesty?

You do me wrong to take me out of the grave,
Thou art a Soul in bliss, but I am bound
Upon a wheel of fire, that mine own tears
Do scaled, like molten Lead.

Sir, do you know me?


You are a spirit I know, where did you dye?


Still, still, far wide.


He Is scarce awake,
Let him alone a while.

Where have I bin?
Where am I? Fair day light?
I am mightily abused; I should even dye with pity
To see another thus. I know not what to say:
I will not swear these are my hands: let us see,
I feel this pin prick, would I were assured
Of my condition.

O look upon me Sir,
And hold your hand in benediction over me,
You must not kneel.

Pray do not mock me:
I am a very foolish fond old man,
Fourscore and upward,
Not an hour more, nor less:
And to deal plainly,
I fear I am not in my perfect mind.
Me thinks I should know you, and know this man,
Yet I am doubtful: For I am mainely ignorant
What place this is* and all the skill I have
Remembers not these garments: nor I know not
Where I did lodge last night. Do not laugh at me,
For (as I am a man) I think this Lady
To be my child Cordelia.

And so I am: I am.


Be your tears wet?
Yes faith: I pray weep not,
If you have poison for me, I will drink it:
I know you do not love me, for your Sisters
Have (as I do remember) done me wrong.
You have some cause, they have not.

No cause, no cause.


Am I in France?


In your own kingdom Sir.


Do not abuse me.


Be comforted good Madam, the great rage
You see is killed in him: desire him to go in,
Trouble him no more till further settling.

Wilt please your Highness walk?


You must bear with me:
Pray you now forget, and forgive,
I am old and foolish.

Know of the Duke if his last purpose hold,
Or whether since he is advised by ought
To change the course, he is full of alteration,
And self reproving, bring his constant pleasure.

Our Sisters man is certainly miscarried.


It Is to be doubted Madam.


Now sweet Lord,
You know the goodness I intend upon you:
Tell me but truly, but then speak the truth,
Do you not love my Sister?

In honored Love.


But have you never found my Brothers way,
To the fore-fended place?

No by mine honor, Madam.


I never shall endure her, dear my Lord
Be not familiar with her.

Fear not, she and the Duke her husband.


Our very loving Sister, well be-met:
Sir, this I heard, the King is come to his Daughter
With others, whom the rigor of our State
Forced to cry out.

Why is this reasond?


Combine together against the Enemy:
For these domesticke and particurlar broiles,
Are not the question here.

Let Us then determine with the ancient of war
On our proceeding.

Sister you will go with us?


No.


It Is most convenient, pray go with us.


Oh ho, I know the Riddle, I will go.


If ere your Grace had speech with man so poor,
Hear me one word.

I Will overtake you, speak.


Before you fight the Battle, open this Letter:
If you have victory, let the Trumpet sound
For him that brought it: wretched though I seem,
I can produce a Champion, that will prove
What is avouched there. If you miscarry,
Your business of the world has so an end,
And machination ceases. Fortune loves you.

Stay till I have read the Letter.


I was forbid it:
When time shall serve, let but the Herald cry,
And I Will appear again.

Why farethee well, I will o're-looke thy paper.


The Enemy's in view, draw up your powers,
Here is the guess of their true strength and Forces,
By dilligent discovery, but your have
Is now urged on you.

We will greet the time.


To both these Sisters have I sworn my love:
Each jealous of the other, as the stung
Are of the Adder. Which of them shall I take?
Both? One? Or neither? Neither can be enjoyed
If both remain alive: To take the Widow,
Exasperates, makes mad her Sister Gonerill,
And hardly shall I carry out my side,
Her husband being alive. Now then, we will use
His countenance for the Battle, which being done,
Let her who would be rid of him, devise
His speedy taking off. As for the mercy
Which he intends to Lear and to Cordelia,
The Battle done, and they within our power,
Shall never see his pardon: for my state,
Stands on me to defend, not to debate.

Here Father, take the shadow of this Tree
For your good host: pray that the right may thrive:
If ever I return to you again,
I Will bring you comfort.

Grace go with you Sir.


Away old man, give me thy hand, away:
King Lear has lost* he and his Daughter taken,
Give me thy hand: Come on.

No further Sir, a man may rot even here.


What in ill thoughts again?
Men must endure
Their going hence, even as their coming hither,
Ripeness is all come on.

And that is true too.


Some Officers take them away: good guard,
Until their greater pleasures first be known
That are to censure them.

We are not the first,
Who with best meaning have incurred the worst:
For thee oppressed King I am cast down,
My self could else out-frowne false Fortunes frown.
Shall we not see these Daughters, and these Sisters?

No, no, no, no: come let us away to prison,
We two alone will sing like Birds in the Cage:
When thou do ask me blessing, I Will kneel down
And ask of thee forgiveness: So we will live,
And pray, and sing, and tell old tales, and laugh
At gilded Butterflies: and here (poor Rogues)
Talk of Court news, and we will talk with them too,
Who looses, and who wins; who is in, who is out;
And take vpon's the mystery of things,
As if we were Gods spies: And we will wear out
In a walled prison, packs and sects of great ones,
That ebb and flow by the Moon.

Take them away.


Upon such sacrifices my Cordelia,
The Gods themselves throw Incense.
Have I caught thee?
He that parts us, shall bring a Brand from Heaven,
And fire us hence, like Foxes: wipe thine eyes,
The good years shall devour them, flesh and fell,
Ere they shall make us weep?
We Will see them starved first: come.

Come hither Captain, hark.
Take thou this note, go follow them to prison,
One step I have advanced thee, if thou do
As this instructs thee, thou do make thy way
To Noble Fortunes: know thou this, that men
Are as the time is; to be tender minded
Does not become a Sword, thy great employment
Will not bear question: either say thou wilt do it,
Or thrive by other means.

I Will do it my Lord.


About it, and write happy, when the have done,
Mark I say instantly, and carry it so
As I have set it down.

Sir, you have showed to day your valiant strain
And Fortune led you well: you have the Captives
Who were the opposites of this days strife:
I do require them of you so to use them,
As we shall find their merits, and our safety
May equally determine.

Sir, I thought it fit,
To send the old and miserable King to some retention,
Whose age had Charms in it, whose Title more,
To pluck the common bosom on his side,
And turn our impressed Lances in our eyes
Which do command them. With him I sent the Queen:
My reason all the same, and they are ready
To morrow, or at further space, t'appeare
Where you shall hold your Session.

Sir, by your patience,
I hold you but a subject of this War,
Not as a Brother.

That Is as we list to grace him.
Methinkes our pleasure might have bin demanded
Ere you had spoke so far. He led our Powers,
Bore the Commission of my place and person,
The which immediacie may well stand up,
And call it self your Brother.

Not so hot:
In his own grace he does exalt himself,
More then in your addition.

In my rights,
By me invested, he compeetes the best.

That were the most, if he should husband you.


Iesters do often prove Prophets.


Hola, hola,
That eye that told you so, looked but a squint.

Lady I am not well, else I should answer
From a full flowing stomach. General,
Take thou my Soldiers, prisoners, patrimony,
Dispose of them, of me, the walls is thine:
Witness the world, that I create thee here
My Lord, and Master.

Mean you to enjoy him?


The let alone lies not in your good will.


Nor in thine Lord.


Halfe-blooded fellow, yes.


Let the Drum strike, and prove my title thine.


Stay yet, hear reason: Edmund, I arrest thee
On capital Treason; and in thy arrest,
This gilded Serpent: for your claim fair Sisters,
I bare it in the interest of my wife,
It Is she is sub-contracted to this Lord,
And I her husband contradict your Bane^.
If you will marry, make your loves to me,
My Lady is bespoke.

An interlude.


Thou art armed Gloucester,
Let the Trmpet sound:
If none appear to prove upon thy person,
Thy heinous, manifest, and many Treasons,
There is my pledge: I Will make it on thy heart
Ere I taste bread, thou art in nothing less
Then I have here proclaimed thee.

Sick, O sick.


If not, I Will nere trust medicine.


There Is my exchange, what in the world lies
That names me Traitor, villain-like he lies,
Call by the Trumpet: he that dares approach;
On him, on you, who not, I will maintain
My truth and honor firmly.

A Herald, ho.
Trust to thy single virtue, for thy Soldiers
All levied in my name, have in my name
Took their discharge.

My sickness grows upon me.


She is not well, convey her to my Tent.
Come hither Herald, let the Trumper sound,
And read out this.

IF any man of quality or degree, within the lists of the Army, will maintain
upon Edmund, supposed Earl of Gloucester, that he is a manifold Traitor, let him
appear by the third sound of the Trumpet: he is bold in his defense


Again.


Again.


Ask him his purposes, why he appears
Upon this Call of the Trumpet.

What are you?
Your name, your quality, and why you answer
This present Summons?

Know my name is lost
By Treasons tooth: bare-gnawne, and Canker-bit,
Yet am I Noble as the Adversary
I come to cope.

Which is that Adversary?


What Is he that speaks for Edmund Earl of Gloucester?


Himself, what say thou to him?


Draw thy Sword,
That if my speech offend a Noble heart,
Thy arm may do thee Justice, here is mine:
Behold it is my privilege,
The privilege of mine Honors,
My oath, and my profession. I protest,
Maugre thy strength, place, youth, and eminence,
Despise thy victor-Sword, and fire new Fortune,
Thy valor, and thy heart, thou art a Traitor:
False to thy Gods, thy Brother, and thy Father,
Conspirant against this high illustirous Prince,
And from the extremest upward of thy head,
To the descent and dust below thy foot,
A most Toad-spotted Traitor. Say thou no,
This Sword, this arm, and my best spirits are bent
To prove upon thy heart, whereto I speak,
Thou lie.

In wisdom I should ask thy name,
But since thy outside looks so fair and Warlike,
And that thy tongue (some say) of breeding breathes,
What safe, and nicely I might well delay,
By rule of Knighthood, I disdain and spurn:
Back do I toss these Treasons to thy head,
With the hell-hated Lie, ore-whelme thy heart,
Which for they yet glance by, and scarely bruise,
This Sword of mine shall give them instant way,
Where they shall rest for ever. Trumpets speak.

Save him, save him.


This is practice Gloucester,
By the law of War, thou wast not bound to answer
An unknown opposite: thou art not vanquished,
But cozend, and be guild.

Shut your mouth Dame,
Or with this paper shall I stop it: hold Sir,
Thou worse then any name, read thine own evil:
No tearing Lady, I perceive you know it.

Say if I do, the Laws are mine not thine,
Who can araigne me for it?

Most monstrous! O, know thou this paper?


Ask me not what I know.


Go after her, she is desperate, govern her.


What you have charged me with,
That have I done,
And more, much more, the time will bring it out.
It Is past, and so am I: But what art thou
That have this Fortune on me? If you are Noble,
I do forgive thee.

Let Us exchange charity:
I am no less in blood then thou art Edmond,
If more, the more the have wronged me.
My name is Edgar and thy Fathers Son,
The Gods are just, and of our pleasant vices
Make instruments to plague us:
The dark and vicious place where thee he got,
Cost him his eyes.

The have spoken right, it is true,
The Wheel is come full circle, I am here.

Me thought thy very gate did prophecy
A Royal Nobleness: I must embrace thee,
Let sorrow split my heart, if ever I
Did hate thee, or thy Father.

Worthy Prince I know it.


Where have you hid your self?
How have you known the miseries of your Father?

By nursing them my Lord. List a brief tale,
And when it is told, O that my heart would burst.
The bloody proclamation to escape
That followed me so near, (O our lives sweetness,
That we the pain of death would hourly dye,
Rather then die at once) taught me to shift
Into a mad-mans rags, t'assume a semblance
That very Dogs disdained: and in this habit
Met I my Father with his bleeding Rings,
Their precious Stones new lost: became his guide,
Led him, begged for him, saved him from despair.
Never (O fault) revealed my self unto him,
Until some half hour past when I was armed,
Not su^e, though hoping of this good success,
I asked his blessing, and from first to last
Told him our pilgrimage. But his flaw'd heart
(Alack too weak the conflict to support)
Twixt two extremes of passion, joy and grief,
Burst smilingly.

This speech of yours has moved me,
And shall perchance do good, but speak you on,
You look as you had something more to say.

If there be more, more woeful, hold it in,
For I am almost ready to dissolve,
Hearing of this.

Help, help: O help.


What kind of help?


Speak man.


What means this bloody Knife?


It Is hot, it smoakes, it came even from the heart of -- O she is dead.


Who dead? Speak man.


Your Lady Sir, your Lady; and her Sister
By her is poisoned: she confesses it.

I was contracted to them both, all three
Now marry in an instant.

Here comes Kent.


Produce the bodies, be they alive or dead;
This judgment of the Heavens that makes us tremble.
Touches us not with pity: O, is this he?
The time will not allow the complement
Which very manners vrges.

I am come
To bid my King and Master aye good night.
Is he not here?

Great thing of us forgot,
Speak Edmund, where is the King? and where is Cordelia?
See thou this object Kent?

Alack, why thus?


Yet Edmund was beloved:
The one the other poisoned for my sake,
And after slew herself.

Even so: cover their faces.


I pant for life: some good I mean to do
Despite of mine own Nature. Quickly send,
(Be brief in it) to' the Castle, for my Writ
Is on the life of Lear, and on Cordelia:
Nay, send in time.

Run, run, O run.


To who my Lord? Who has the Office?
Send thy token of repreeue.

Well thought on, take my Sword,
Give it the Captain.

Have thee for thy life.


He has Commission from thy Wife and me,
To hang Cordelia in the prison, and
To lay the blame upon her own despair,
That she for-did her self.

The Gods defend her, bear him hence awhile.


Howl, howl, howl: O your are men of stones,
Had I your tongues and eyes, Il'd use them so,
That Heavens vault should crack: she is gone for ever.
I know when one is dead, and when one lives,
She Is dead as earth: Lend me a Looking-glass,
If that her breath will mist or stain the stone,
Why then she lives.

Is this the promised end?


Or image of that horror.


Fall and cease.


This feather stirs, she lives: if it be so,
It is a chance which does redeem all sorrows
That ever I have felt.

O my good Master.


Prithee away.


It Is Noble Kent your Friend.


A plague upon you Murderors, Traitors all,
I might have saved her, now she is gone for ever:
Cordelia, Cordelia, stay a little. Ha:
What is it thou say? Her voice was ever soft,
Gentle, and low, an excellent thing in woman.
I killed the Slave that was a hanging thee.

It Is true (my Lords) he did.


Did I not fellow?
I have seen the day, with my good biting Faulchion
I would have made him skip: I am old now,
And these same crosses spoil me. Who are you?
Mine eyes are not of the best, I Will tell you straight.

If Fortune brag of two, she loved and hated,
One of them we behold.

This is a dull sight, are you not Kent?


The same: your Servant Kent,
Where is your Servant Caius?

He Is a good fellow, I can tell you that,
He Will strike and quickly too, he is dead and rotten.

No my good Lord, I am the very man.


I Will see that straight.


That from your first of difference and decay,
Have followed your sad steps.

Your are welcome hither.


Nor no man else:
All Is cheerlesse, dark, and deadly,
Your eldest Daughters have fore-done themselves,
And desperately are dead

I so I think.


He knows not what he says, and vain is it
That we present us to him.

Very bootlesse.


Edmund is dead my Lord.


That Is but a trifle here:
You Lords and Noble Friends, know our intent,
What comfort to this great decay may come,
Shall be applied. For us we will resign,
During the life of this old Majesty
To him our absolute power, you to your rights,
With boot, and such addition as your Honors
Have more then merited. All Friends shall
Taste the wages of their virtue, and all Foes
The cup of their deseruings: O see, see.

And my poor Fool is hanged: no, no, no life?
Why should a Dog, a Horse, a Rat have life,
And thou no breath at all? Thou Wilt come no more,
Never, never, never, never, never.
Pray you undo this Button. Thank you Sir,
Do you see this? Look on her? Look her lips,
Look there, look there.

He faints, my Lord, my Lord.


Break heart, I prithee break.


Look up my Lord.


Vex not his ghost, O let him pass, he hates him,
That would upon the wrack of this tough world
Stretch him out longer.

He is gone indeed.


The wonder is, he has endured so long,
He but usurped his life.

Bear them from hence, our present business
Is general woe: Friends of my soul, you twain,
Rule in this Realm, and the gored state sustain.

I have a journey Sir, shortly to go,
My Master calls me, I must not say no.

The weight of this sad time we must obey,
Speak what we feel, not what we ought to say:
The oldest has borne most, we that are young,
Shall never see so much, nor live so long.


