NOw say Chatillion, what would France with us?


Thus (after greeting) speaks the King of France,
In my behavior to the Majesty*
The borrowed Majesty of England here.

A strange beginning: borrowed Majesty?


Silence (good mother) hear the Embassy.


Philip of France, in right and true behalf
Of thy deceased brother, Geffreyes son,
Arthur Plantagines, lays most lawful claim
To this fair Island, and the Territories:
To Ireland, Poyctiers, Aniowe, Torayne, Maine,
Desiring thee to lay aside the sword
Which swaies usurpingly these several titles,
And put the same into young Arthurs hand,
Thy Nephew, and right royal Sovereign*

What follows if we disallow of this?


The proud control of fierce and bloody war,
To enforce these rights, so forcibly withheld,

Here have we wat for war, and blood for blood,
Controlement for controlement* so answer France.

Then take my Kings defiance from my mouth,
The farthest limit of my Embassy.

Bear mine to him, and so depart in peace,
Be thou as lightning in the eyes of France:
For ere thou can report, I will be there:
The thunder of my Cannon shall be heard,
So hence: be thou the trumpet of our wraths
And sullen presage of your own decay;
An honorable conduct let him have,
Pembroke look to it farewell Chattillion.

What now my son, have I not ever said
How that ambitious Constance would not coast
Till she had kindled France and all the world,
Upon the right and party of her son.
This might have been preue^ed, and made whole
With very easy arguments of love,
Which now the ma^nage of two kingdoms must
With fearful bloody issue arbitrate,

Out strong possession, and our right for us,


Your strong possession much more then your right,
Or else it must go wrong with you and me,
So much my conscience whispers in your ear,
Which none but heaven, and you, and I, shall hear.

My Liege, here is the strangest controversy
Come from the Country to be judged by you
That ere I heard: shall I produce the men?

Let them approach:
Our Abbeys and our Priories shall pay
This expeditious charge what men are you?

Your faithful subject, I a gentleman,
Borne in Northamptonshire, and eldest son
As I suppose, to Robert Faulconbridge,
A Soldier by the Honor-giuing-hand
Of Cordelion, Knighted in the field.

What art thou?


The son and heir to that same Faulconbridge.


Is that the elder, and art thou the heir?
You came not of one mother then it seems.

Most certain of one mother, mighty King.
That is well known, and as I think one father:
But for the certain knowledge of that truth,
I put you over to heaven, and to my mother;
Of that I doubt, as all men's children may.

Out on thee rude man, you do shame thy mother,
And wound her honor with this diffidence.

I Madame? No, I have no reason for it.
That is my brothers plea, and none of mine,
The which if he can prove, a pops me out,
At least from fair five hundred pound a year:
Heaven guard my mothers honor, and my Land.

A good blunt fellow: why being younger born
Does he lay claim to thine inheritance?

I know not why, except to get the land:
But once he slanderd me with bastardy:
But where I be as true begot or no,
That still I lay upon my mothers head,
But that I am as well begot my Liege
(Fair fall the bones that took the pains for me)
Compare our faces, and be Judge your self
If old Sir Robert did beget us both,
And were our father, and this son like him:
O old sir Robert Father, on my knee
I give heaven thanks I was not like to thee.

Why what a mad-cap has heaven lent us here?


He has a trick of Cordelions face,
The accent of his tongue affects him:
Do you not read some tokens of my son
In the large composition of this man?

Mine eye has well examined his parts,
And finds them perfect Richard: sir speak,
What does move you to claim your brother^ l^d.

Because he has a half-(...) like my (...)
With half that face would he have all my ^and
A halfe-fac'd groa^ five hundred pound a year.

My gracious Liege; when that my father lived,
Your brother did employ my father much.

Well sir, by this you cannot get my land,
Your tale must be how he employed my mother*

And once dispatched him in an Embassy
To Germany, there with the Emperor
To treat of high affairs touching that time:
The advantage of his absence took the King,
And in the mean time soiourn'd at my fathers;
Where how he did prevail, I shame to speak:
But truth is truth, large lengths of seas and shores
Between my father, and my mother lay,
As I have heard my father speak himself
When this same lusty gentleman was got:
Upon his deathbed he by will bequeathed
His lands to me, and took it on his death
That this my mothers son was none of his;
And if he were, he came into the world
Full fourteen weeks before the course of time:
Then good my Liege let me have what is mine,
My fathers land, as was my fathers will.

Sir, your brother is Legittimate,
Your fathers wife did after wedlock bear him:
And if she did play false, the fault was hers;
Which fault lies on the hazards of all husbands
That marry wives: tell me, how if my brother
Who as you say, took pains to get this son,
Had of your father claimed this son for his,
Insooth, good friend, your father might have kept
This Calfe, bred from his Cow from all the world:
Insooth he might: then if he were my brothers,
My brother might not claim him, nor your father
Being none of his, refuse him: this concludes,
My mothers son did get your fathers heir,
Your fathers heir must have your fathers land.

Shall then my fathers Will be of no force,
To dispossess that child which is not his.

Of no more force to dispossess me sir,
Then was his will to get me, as I think.

Whether had thou rather be a Faulconbridge,
And like thy brother to enjoy thy land:
Or the reputed son of Cordelion,
Lord of thy presence, and no land beside.

Madam, and if my brother had my shape
And I had his, sir Roberts his like him,
And if my legs were two such riding rods,
My arms, such eele skins stuffed, my face so thin,
That in mine ear I du^st not stick a rose.
Lest men should say, look where three farthings goes,
And to his shape were heir to all this land,
Would I might never stir from off this place,
I would give it every foot to have this face:
It would not be sir nobbe in any case.

I like thee well: will thou forsake thy fortune,
Bequeath thy land to him, and follow me?
I am a Soldier, and now bound to France.

Brother, take you my land, I Will take my chance;
Your face has got five hundred pound a y^ere,
Yet sell your face for five pence and it is dear:
Madam, I Will follow you unto the death.

Nay, I would have you go before me thither.


Our Country manners give our betters way.


What i^ thy name?


Philip ^y Liege, so is my name begun, Philip, good old Sir Roberts wives
eldest son


From henceforth bear his name
Whose for me thou bear:
Kneel thou down Philip, but rise more great,
Arise Sir Richard, and Plantagenet.

Brother by the mothers side, give me your hand,
My father gave me honor, yours gave land:
Now blessed be the hour by night or day
When I was got, Sir Robert was away.

The very spirit of Plantaginet:
I am thy grandame Richard, call me so.

Madam by chance, but not by truth, what tho;
Something about a little from the right,
In at the window, or else ore the hatch:
Who dares not stir by day, must walk by night,
And have is have, how ever men do catch:
Near or far off well won is still well shot,
And I am I, how ere I was begot.

Go, Faulconbridge, now have thou thy desire,
A landlesse Knight, makes thee a landed Squire:
Come Madam, and come Richard, we must speed
For France, for France, for it is more then need.

Brother adieu, good fortune come to thee,
For thou wast got in th way of honesty.

A foot of Honor better then I was,
But many a many foot of Land the worse.
Well, now can I make any Ioane a Lady,
Good den Sir Richard, God a mercy fellow,
And if his name be George, I Will call him Peter;
For new made honor does forget men's names:
It Is two respective, and too sociable
For your conversion, now your traveler,
He and his tooth-picke at my worships mess,
And when my knightly stomach is suffis'd,
Why then I suck my teeth, and catechize
My picked man of Countries: my dear sir,
Thus leaning on mine elbow I begin,
I shall beseech you; that is question now,
And then comes answer like an Absey book:
O sir, says answer, at your best command,
At your employment, at your service sir:
No sir, says question, I sweet sir at yours,
And so ere answer knows what question would,
Saving in Dialogue of Complement,
And talking of the Alps and Appenines,
The Perennean and the river Poe,
It draws toward fupper in conclusion so.
But this is worshipful society,
And fits the mounting spirit like my self;
For he is but a bastard to the time
That does not smoke of observation,
And so am I whether I smacke or no:
And not alone in habit and device,
Exterior form, outward accoutrement;
But from the inward motion to deliver
Sweet, sweet, sweet poison for the ages tooth,
Which though I will not practice to deceive,
Yet to avoid deceit I mean to learn;
For it shall strew the footsteps of my rising:
But who comes in such haste in riding robes?
What woman post is this? has she no husband
That will take pains to blow a horn before her?
O me, it is my mother: how now good Lady,
What brings you here to Court so hastily?

Where is that slave thy brother? where is he?
That holds in chase mine honor up and down.

My brother Robert, old Sir Roberts son:
Colbrand the Giant, that same mighty man,
Is it Sir Roberts son that you seek so?

Sir Roberts son, I thou irreverent boy,
Sir Roberts son? why scorn'st thou at sir Robert?
He is Sir Roberts son, and so art thou.

James Gournie, will thou give us leave a while?


Good leave good Philip.


Philip, sparrow, James,
There Is toys abroad, anon I Will tell thee more.
Madam, I was not old Sir Roberts son,
Sir Robert might have eat his part in me
Upon good Friday, and nere broke his fast:
Sir Robert could do well, marry to confess
Could get me sir Robert could not do it;
We know his handy-worke, therefore good mother
To whom am I beholding for these limbs?
Sir Robert never help to make this leg.

Have thou conspired with thy brother too,
That for thine own gain should defend mine honor?
What means this scorn, thou most untoward knave?

Knight, knight good mother, Basilisco-like:
What, I am dubbed, I have it on my shoulder:
But mother, I am not Sir Roberts son,
I have disclaimed Sir Robert and my land,
Legitimation, name, and all is gone;
Then good my mother, let me know my father,
Some proper man I hope, who was it mother?

Have thou denied thy self a Faulconbridge?


As faithfully as I deny the devil.


King Richard Cordelion was thy father,
By long and vehement suit I was seduced
To make room for him in my husbands bed:
Heaven lay not my transgression to my charge,
That art the issue of my dear offense
Which was so strongly urged past my defense.

Now by this light were I ^o get again,
Madam I would not wish a better father:
Some sins do bear their privilege on earth,
And so does yours: your fault, was not your folly,
Needs must you lay your heart at his dispose,
Subjected tribute to commanding love,
Against whose fury and unmatched force,
The awlesse Lion could not wage the fight,
Nor keep his Princely heart from Richards hand
He that perforce robs Lions of their hearts,
May easily win a woman's: aye my mother,
With all my heart I thank thee for my father:
Who lives and dares but say, thou did not well
When I was got, I Will send his soul to hell.
Come Lady I will show thee to my kin,
And they shall say, when Richard me begot,
If thou had said him nay, it had been sin;
Who says it was, he lies, I say it was not.

Before Angiers well met brave Austria,
Arthur that great forerunner of thy blood,
Richard that robbed the Lion of his heart,
And fought the holy Wars in Palestine,
By this brave Duke came early to his grave:
And for amends to his posterity,
At our importance hither is he come,
To spread his colors boy, in thy behalf,
And to rebuke the usurpation
Of thy unnatural Uncle, English John,
Embrace him, love him, give him welcome hither.

God shall forgive you Cordelions death
The rather, that you give his offspring life,
Shadowing their right under your wings of war:
I give you welcome with a powerless hand,
But with a heart full of unstained love,
Welcome before the gates of Angiers Duke.

A noble boy, who would not do thee right?


Upon thy cheek lay I this zealous kiss,
As seal to this indenture of my love:
That to my home I will no more return
Till Angiers, and the right thou have in France,
Together with that pale, that white-fac'd shore,
Whose foot spurns back the Oceans roaring tides,
And coopes from other lands her Ilanders,
Even till that England hedged in with the maine,
That Water-walled Bulwark, still secure
And confident from foreign purposes,
Even till that utmost corner of the West
Salute thee for her King, till then fair boy
Will I not think of home, but follow Arms.

O take his mothers thanks, a widows thanks,
Till your strong hand shall help to give him strength,
To make a more requital to your love.

The peace of heaven is theirs yt lift their swords
In such a just and charitable war.

Well, then to work our Cannon shall be bent
Against the brows of this resisting town,
Call for our cheifest men of discipline,
To cull the plots of best advantages:
We Will lay before this town our Royal bones,
Wade to the marketplace in French-mens blood,
But we will make it subject to this boy.

Stay for an answer to your Embassy,
Lest vnaduis'd you stain your swords with blood,
My Lord Chattilion may from England bring
That right in peace which here we urge in war,
And then we shall repent each drop of blood,
That hot rash haste so indirectly shed.

A wonder Lady: lo upon thy wish
Our Messenger Chattilion is arrived,
What England says, say breefely gentle Lord,
We coldly pause for thee, Chatilion speak,

Then turn your forces from this paltry siege,
And stir them up against a mightier task:
England impatient of your just demands,
Has put himself in Arms, the adverse winds
Whose leisure I have staid, have given him time
To land his Legions all as soon as I:
His marches are expedient to this town,
His forces strong, his Soldiers confident:
With him along is come the Mother Queen,
An Ace stirring him to blood and strife,
With her her Niece, the Lady Blanch of Spain,
With them a Bastard of the Kings deceast,
And all the unsettled humors of the Land,
Rash, inconsiderate, fiery voluntaries,
With Ladies faces, and fierce Dragons spleenes,
Have sold their fortunes at their native homes,
Bearing their birthrights proudly on their backs,
To make a hazard of new fortunes here:
In brief, a brauer choice of dauntlesse spirits
Then now the English bottomes have waft over,
Did never flote upon the swelling tide,
To do offense and scathe in Christendom:
The interruption of their churlish drums
Cuts off more circumstance, they are at hand,
To parlie or to fight, therefore prepare.

How much unlooked for, is this expedition.


By how much unexpected, by so much
We must awake endeavor for defense,
For courage mounteth with occasion,
Let them be welcome then, we are prepared.

Peace be to France: If France in peace permit
Our just and lineall entrance to our own;
If not, bleed France, and peace ascend to heaven.
Whiles we Gods wrathful agent do correct
Their proud contempt that beats his peace to heaven.

Peace be to England, if that war return
From France to England, there to live in peace:
England we love, and for that Englands sake,
With burden of our armor here we sweat:
This toil of ours should be a work of thine;
But thou from loving England art so far,
That thou have vnder-wrought his lawful King,
Cut off the sequence of posterity,
Out-faced Infant State, and done a rape
Upon the maiden virtue of the Crown:
Look here upon thy brother Geffreyes face,
These eyes, these brows, were molded out of his;
This little abstract does contain that large,
Which died in G^ffrey: and the hand of time,
Shall draw this brief into as huge a volume:
That Geffrey was thy elder brother borne,
And this his son, England was Geffreys right,
And this is Geffreyes in the name of God:
How comes it then that thou art called a King,
When living blood does in these temples beat
Which owe the crown, that thou ore-masterest?

From whom have thou this great commission
To draw my answer from thy Articles?

From that supernal Judge that stirs good thoughts France,
In any beast of strong authority,
To look into the blots and stains of right.
That Judge has made me guardian to this boy,
Under whose warrant I impeach thy wrong,
And by whose help I mean to chastise it.

Alack thou do usurp authority.


Excuse it is to beat usurping down.


Who is it thou do call usurper France?


Let me make answer: thy usurping son.


Out insolent, thy bastard shall be King,
That thou may be a Queen, and check the world.

My bed was ever to thy son as true
As thine was to thy husband, and this boy
Liker in feature to his father Geffrey
Then thou and John, in manners being as like,
As rain to water, or devil to his damme;
My boy a bastard? by my soul I think
His father never was so true begot,
It cannot be, and if thou were his mother.

There Is a good mother boy, that blots thy father


There Is a good grandame boy
That would blot thee.

Peace.


Hear the Crier.


What the devil art thou?


One that will play the devil sir with you,
And a may catch your hide and you alone:
You are the Hare of whom the Proverb goes
Whose valor plucks dead Lions by the beard;
I Will smoke your skin-coat and I catch you right,
Sir look to it, in faith I will, in faith.

O well did he become that Lions robe,
That did disrobe the Lion of that robe.

It lies as sightly on the back of him
As great Alcides shoes upon an Ass:
But Ass, I Will take that burden from your back,
Or lay on that shall make your shoulders crack.

What cracker is this same that deafes our ears
With this abundance of superfluous breath?
King Lewis, determine what we shall do strait.

Women and fools, break off your conference.
King John, this is the very sum of all:
England and Ireland, Angiers, Toraine, Maine,
In right of Arthur do I claim of thee:
Will thou resign them, and lay down thy Arms?

My life as soon: I do defy thee France,
Arthur of Britain, yield thee to my hand,
And out of my dear love I Will give thee more,
Then ere the coward hand of France can win;
Submit thee boy.

Come to thy grandame child.


Do child, go to yt grandame child,
Give grandame kingdom, and it grandame will
Give yt a plum, a cherry, and a fig,
There Is a good grandame.

Good my mother peace,
I would that I were low laid in my grave,
I am not worth this coil that is made for me.

His mother shames him so, poor boy he weeps.


Now shame upon you where she does or no,
His gran^ames wrongs, and not his mothers shames
Draws those heauen-mouing pearls from his poor eyes,
Which heaven shall take in nature of a fee:
I, with these Crystal beads heaven shall be bribed
To do him Justice, and revenge on you.

Thou monstrous slanderer of heaven and earth.


Thou monstrous of Iniurer of heaven and earth,
Call not me slanderer, thou and thine usurp
The Dominations, Royalties, and rights
Of this oppressed boy; this is thy eldest sons son,
Unfortunate in nothing but in thee:
Thy sins are visited in this poor child,
The Canon of the Law is laid on him,
Being but the second generation
Removed from thy sinne-conceiuing womb.

Bedl^ have done.


I have but this to say,
That he is not only plagued for her sin,
But God has made her sin and her, the plague
On this removed issue, plagued for her,
And with her plague her sin: his injury
Her injury the Beadle to her sin,
All punished (...) the person of this child,
And all for her, a plague upon her.

Thou unadvised scold, I can produce
A Will, that bars the title of thy son.

I who doubts that, a Will: a wicked will,
A woman's will, a cankred Grandams will.

Peace Lady, pause, or be more temperate,
It ill beseemes this presence to cry aim
To these ill-tuned repetitions:
Some Trumpet summon hither to the walls
These men of Angiers, let us hear them speak,
Whose title they admit, Arthurs or John's.

Who is it that has warned us to the walls?


It Is France, for England.


England for it self:
You men of Angiers, and my loving subjects.

You loving men of Angiers, Arthurs subjects,
Our Trumpet called you to this gentle parle.

For our advantage, therefore hear us first:
These flagges of France that are advanced here
Before the eye and prospect of your Town,
Have hither marched to your endamagement.
The Canons have their bowels full of wrath,
And ready mounted are they to spit forth
Their Iron indignation against your walls:
All preparation for a bloody siedge
And merciles proceeding, by these French.
Comfort yours Cities eyes, your winking gates:
And but for our approach, those sleeping stones,
That as a waste does girdle you about
By the compulsion of their Ordinance,
By this time from their fixed beds of lime
Had bin dishabited, and wide havoc made
For bloody power to rush upon your peace.
But on the sight of us your lawful King,
Who painefully with much expedient march
Have brought a counter-cheeke before your gates,
To save vnscratch'd your Cities threatened cheeks:
Behold the French amazed vouchsafe a parle,
And now instead of bulletts wrapped in fire
To make a shaking fever in your walls,
They shoot but calm words, folded up in smoke,
To make a faithless error in your ears,
Which trust accordingly kind Citizens,
And let us in. Your King, whose labored spirits
Fore-wearied in this action of swift speed,
Craves harbourage within your City walls.

When I have said, make answer to us both.
Lo in this right hand, whose protection
Is most divinely vowed upon the right
Of him it holds, stands young Pl^tagen^s,
Son to the elder brother of this man,
And King ore him, and all that he enioyes:
For this downe-troden equity, we tread
In warlike march, these greenes before your Town,
Being no further enemy to you
Then the constraint of hospitable zeal,
In the relief of this oppressed child,
Religiously prouokes. Be pleased then
To pay that duty which you truly owe,
To him that owes it, namely, this young Prince,
And then our Arms, like to a muzled Bear,
Save in aspect, has all offense sealed up:
Our Cannons malice vainly shall be spent
Against the involuerable clouds of heaven,
And with a blessed and vn-vext retire,
With vnhack'd swords, and Helmets all vnbruis'd,
We will bear home that Iustie blood again,
Which here we came to spout against your Town,
And leave your children, wives, and you in peace.
But if you fondly pass our proffered offer,
It Is not the rounder of your old-fac'd walls,
Can hide you from our messengers of War,
Though all these English, and their discipline
Were harbored in their rude circumference:
Then tell us, Shall your City call us Lord,
In that behalf which we have challenged it?
Or shall we give the signal to our rage,
And stalk in blood to our possession?

In brief, we are the King of Englands subjects
For him, and in his right, we hold this Town.

Acknowledge then the King, and let me in.


That can we not: but he that proves the King
To him will we prove loyal, till that time
Have we ramm'd up our gates against the world.

Does not the Crown of England, prove the King?
And if not that, I bring you Witnesses
Twice fifteen thousand hearts of Englands breed.

Bastards and else.


To verify our title with their lives.


As many and as well-borne bloods as those.


Some Bastards too.


Stand in his face to contradict his claim.


Till you compound whose right is worthiest,
We for the worthiest hold the right from both.

Then God forgive the sin of all those souls,
That to their everlasting residence,
Before the dew of evening fall, shall fleet
In dreadful trial of our kingdoms King.

Amen, Amen, mount Cheualiers to Arms.


Saint George that swindg'd the Dragon,
And ere since sit's on's horseback at mine Hostess door
Teach us some fence. Sirrah, were I at home
At your den sirrah, with your Lioness,
I would set an Oxe-head to your Lions hide:
And make a monster of you.

Peace, no more.


O tremble: for you hear the Lion rore.


Up higher to the plain, where we will set forth
In best appointment all our Regiments.

Speed then to take advantage of the field.


It shall be so, and at the other hill*
Command the rest to stand* God and our right.

You men of Angiers open wide your gates,
And let young Arthur Duke of Britain in,
Who by the hand of France, this day has made
Much work for tears in many an English mother,
Whose sons lie scattered on the bleeding ground*
Many a widows husband groueling lies,
Coldly embracing the discolored earth,
And victory with little loss does play
Upon the dancing banners of the French,
Who are at hand triumphantly displayed
To enter Conquerors, and to proclaim
Arthur of Britain, Englands King, and yours.

Rejoice you men of Angiers, ring your bells,
King John, your king and Englands, does approach,
Commander of this hot malicious day,
Their Armours that marched hence so silver bright,
Hither return all gilt with Frenchmens blood:
There stuck no plume in any English Crest,
That is removed by a staff of France.
Our colors do return in those same hands
That did display them when we first marched forth:
And like a jolly troop of Huntsmen come
Our lusty English, all with purpled hands,
Did in the dying slaughter of their foes,
Open your gates, and give the Victors way.

Heralds, from off our towers we might behold
From first to last, the onset and retire*
Of both your Armies, whose equality
By our best eyes cannot be censured:
Blood has bought blood, and blows have answered blows:
Strength matched with strength, and power confronted power,
Both are alike, and both alike we like:
One must prove greatest. While they weigh so even,
We hold our Town for neither: yet for both.

France, have thou yet more blood to cast away?
Say, shall the current of our right rome on,
Whose passage vexed with thy impediment,
Shall leave his native channel, and ore-swell
with course disturbed even thy confining shores,
Unless thou let his silver Water, keep
A peaceful progress to the Ocean.

England thou have not saved one drop of blood
In this hot trial more then we of France,
Rather lost more. And by this hand I swear
That swayes the earth this Climate ouer-lookes,
Before we will lay down our iust-borne Arms,
We Will put thee down, against whom these Arms we bear,
Or add a royal number to the dead:
Gracing the scroule that tells of this wars loss,
With slaughter coupled to the name of kings.

Ha Majesty: how high thy glory towers,
When the rich blood of kings is set on fire:
Oh now does death line his dead chaps with steel,
The swords of soldiers are his teeth, his phangs,
And now he feasts, mousing the flesh of men
In vndetermin'd differences of kings.
Why stand these royal fronts amazed thus:
Cry havoc kings, back to the stained field
You equal Potents, fiery kindled spirits,
Then let confusion of one part confirm
The others peace: till then, blows, blood, and death.

Whose party do the Townsmen yet admit?


Speak Citizens for England, whose your king.


The king of England, when we know the king.


Know him in us, that here hold up his right.


In Us, that are our own great Deputy,
And bear possession of our Person here*
Lord of our presence Angiers, and of you.

A greater power then* We denies all this,
And till it be undoubted, we do lock
Our former scruple in our strong barred gates:
Kings of our fear, until our fears resolved
Be by some certain king, purged and deposed.

By heaven, these scroyles of Angiers flout you kings,
And stand securely on their battelments,
As in a Theater, whence they gape and point
At your industrious Scenes and acts of death.
Your Royal presences be ruled by me,
Do like the Mutines of Jerusalem,
Be friends awhile, and both conioyntly bend
Your sharpest Deeds of malice on this Town.
By East and West let France and England mount.
Their battering Canon charged to the mouths,
Till their soule-fearing clamours have braul'd down
The flintie ribs of this contemptuous City,
I Would play incessantly upon these Iades,
Even till unfenced desolation
Leave them as naked as the vulgar air:
That done, disseuer your united strengths,
And part your mingled colors once again,
Turn face to face, and bloody point to point:
Then in a moment Fortune shall cull forth
Out of one side her happy Minion,
To whom in favor she shall give the day,
And kiss him with a glorious victory:
How like you this wild counsel mighty States,
Smackes it not something of the policy.

Now by the sky that hangs above our heads,
I like it well. France, shall we knit our powers,
And lay this Angiers even with the ground,
Then after fight who shall be king of it?

And if thou have the mettle of a king,
Being wronged as we are by this peevish Town:
Turn thou the mouth of thy Artillery,
As we will ours, against these saucy walls,
And when that we have dashed them to the ground,
Why then defy each other, and pell-mell,
Make work upon our selves, for heaven or hell.

Let it be so: say, where will you assault?


We from the West will send destruction
Into this Cities bosom.

I from the North.


Our Thunder from the South,
Shall rain their drift of bullets on this Town.

O prudent discipline! From North to South:
Austria and France shoot in each others mouth.
I Will stir them to it: Come, away, away.

Hear us great kings, vouchsafe awhile to stay
And I shall show you peace, and faire-fac'd league:
Win you this City without stroke, or wound,
Rescue those breathing lives to dye in beds,
That here come sacrifices for the field.
Persevere not, but hear me mighty kings.

Speak on with favor, we are bent to hear.


That daughter there of Spain, the Lady Blanch
Is near to England, look upon the years
Of Jews the Dolphin, and that lovely maid.
If lusty love should go in quest of beauty,
Where should he find it fairer, the^ in Blanch:
If zealous love should go in search of virtue,
Where should he find i^ purer then in Blanch?
If love ambitious, sought a match of birth,
Whose veins bound richer blood then Lady Blanch?
Such as she is, in beauty, virtue, birth,
Is the young Dolphin every way complete,
If not complete of, say he is not she,
And she again wants nothing, to name want,
If want it be not, that she is not he:
He is the halfe-part o^ a blessed man,
Left to be finished by such as she,
And she a fair divided excellence,
Whose fullness of perfection lies in him.
O two such silver currents when they join
Do glorify the banks that bound them in:
And two such shores, to two such streams made one,
Two such controlling bounds shall you be, kings,
To these two Princes, if you marry them:
This Union shall do more then battery can
To our fast closed gates: for at this match,
With swifter spleen then powder can enforce
The mouth of passage shall we sling wide open,
And give you entrance: but without this match,
The sea enraged is not half so deaf,
Lions more confident, Mountains and rocks
More free from motion, no not death himself
In mortal fury half so peremptory,
As we to keep this City.

Heeres a stay,
That shakes the rotten carcass of old death
Out of his rags. Here Is a large mouth indeed,
That spits forth death, and mountains, rocks, and seas,
Talks as familiarly of roaring Lions,
As maids of thirteen do of puppi-dogges.
What Cannoneere begot this Iustie blood,
He speaks plain Cannon fire, and smoke, and bounce,
He gives the bastinado with his tongue:
Our ears are cudgel'd, not a word of his
But buffets better then a fist of France:
Zounds, I was never so bethumpt with words,
Since I first called my brothers father Dad.

Son, list to this conjunction, make this match
Give with our Niece a dowry large enough,
For by this knot, thou shall so surely tie
Thy now vnsur'd assurance to the Crown,
That you green boy shall have no Sun to ripe
The bloome that promises a mighty fruit.
I see a yielding in the looks of France:
Mark how they whisper, urge them while their souls
Are capeable of this ambition,
Least zeal now melted by the windy breath
Of soft petitions, pity and remorse,
Cool and congeale again to what it was.

Why answer not the double Majesty's,
This friendly treaty of our threatened Town.

Speak England first, that has bin forward first
To speak unto this City: what say you?

If that the Dolphin there thy Princely son,
Can in this book of beauty r^ad, I love:
Her Dowry shall weigh equal with a Queen:
For Angiers, and fair Toraine Maine, Poyctiers,
And all that we upon this side the Sea,
(Except this City now by us besiedg'd)
Find liable to our Crown and Dignity,
Shall gild her bridal bed and make her rich
In titles, honors, and promotions,
As she in beauty, education, blood,
Holds hand with any Princess of the world.

What sai'st thou boy? look in the Ladies face.


I do my Lord, and in her eye I find
A wonder, or a wondrous miracle,
The shadow of my self formed in her eye,
Which being but the shadow of your son,
Becomes a son and makes your son a shadow:
I do protest I never loved my self
Till now, infixed I beheld my self,
Drawn in the flattering table of her eye.

Drawn in the flattering table of her eye,
Hanged in the frowning wrinkle of her brow,
And quartered in her heart, he does epsy
Himself loves traitor, this is pity now;
That hanged, and drawn, and quartered there should be
In such a love, so vile a Lout as he.

My uncles will in this respect is mine,
If he see ought in you that makes him like,
That any thing he see's which moves his liking,
I can with ease translate it to my will:
Or if you will, to speak more properly,
I will enforce it easlie to my love.
Further I will not flatter you, my Lord,
That all I see in you is worthy love,
Then this, that nothing do I see in you,
Though churlish thoughts themselves should be your Judge,
That I can find, should merit any hate.

What say these yong-ones? What say you my Niece?


That she is bound in honor still to do
What you in wisdom still vouchsafe to say.

Speak then Prince Dolphin, can you love this Lady?


Nay ask me if I can refrain from love,
For I do love her most unfeignedly.

Then do I give Volquessen, Toraine, Maine,
Poyctiers, and Aniow, these five Provinces
With her to thee, and this addition more,
Full thirty thousand Marks of English coin:
Phillip of France, if thou be pleased withal,
Command thy son and daughtet to join hands.

It likes us well young Princes: close your hands


And your lips too, for I am well assured,
That I did so when I was first assured.

Now Citizens of Angires open your gates,
Let in that amity which you have made,
For at Saint Mary's Chapel presently,
The rights of marriage shallbe solemnized.
Is not the Lady Constance in this troop*
I know she is not for this match made up,
Her presence would have interrupted much.
Where is she and her son, tell me, who knows?

She is sad and passionate at your highness Tent.


And by my faith, this league that we have made
Will give her sadness very little cure:
Brother of England, how may we content
This widow Lady? In her right we came,
Which we God knows, have turn^d another way,
To our own vantage.

We will heal up all,
For we will create young Arthur Duke of Britain
And Earl of Richmond; and this rich fair Town
We make him Lord of. Call the Lady Constance,
Some speedy Messenger bid her repair
To our solemnity: I trust we shall,
(If not fill up the measure of her will)
Yet in some measure satisfy her so,
That we shall stop her exclamation,
Go we as well as have will suffer us,
To this unlooked for unprepared pomp.

Mad world, mad kings, mad composition:
John to stop Arthurs Title in the whole,
Has willingly departed with a part,
And France, whose armor Conscience buckled on,
Whom zeal and charity brought to the field,
As Gods own soldier, rounded in the ear,
With that same purpose-changer, that slye devil,
That Broker, that still breaks the pate of faith,
That daily breake-vow, he that winnes of all,
Of kings, of beggars, old men, young men, maids,
Who having no external thing to loose,
But the word Maid, cheats the poor Maid of that.
That smooth-faced Gentleman, tickling commodity.
Commodity, the byas of the world,
The world, who of it self is peysed well.
Made to run even, upon even ground:
Till this advantage, this vile drawing byas,
This sway of motion, this commodity,
Makes it take head from all indifferency,
From all direction, purpose, course, intent.
And this same byas, this Commodity,
This Bawd, this Broker, this all-changing-word,
Clapped on the outward eye of fickle France,
Has drawn him from his own determined aid,
From a resolved and honorable war,
To a most base and vile-concluded peace.
And why rail I on this Commodity?
But for because he has not wooed me yet:
Not that I have the power to clutch my hand,
When his fair Angels would salute my palm,
But for my hand, as unattempted yet,
Like a poor beggar, raileth on the rich.
Well, whiles I am a beggar, I will rail,
And say there is no sin but to be rich:
And being rich, my virtue then shall be,
To say there is no vice, but beggerie:
Since Kings break faith upon commodity,
Gain be my Lord, for I will worship thee.

Gone to be married? Gone to swear a peace?
False blood to false blood joined. Gone to be friends?
Shall Lewis have Blaunch, and Blaunch those Provinces?
It is not so, thou have mispoke, misheard,
Be well advised, tell ore thy tale again.
It cannot be, thou do but say it is so.
I trust I may not trust thee, for thy word
Is but the vain breath of a common man:
Believe me, I do not believe thee man,
I have a Kings oath to the contrary.
Thou shall be punished for thus frighting me,
For I am sick, and capeable of fears,
Oppressed with wrongs, and therefore full of fears,
A widow, husbandles, subject to fears,
A woman naturally borne to fears;
And though thou now confess thou did but jest
With my vexed spirits, I cannot take a Truce,
But they will quake and tremble all this day.
What do thou mean by shaking of thy head?
Why do thou look so sadly on my son?
What means that hand upon that breast of thine?
Why holds thine eye that lamentable rhewme,
Like a proud river peering ore his bounds?
Be these sad signs confirmers of thy words?
Then speak again, not all thy former tale,
But this one word, whether thy tale be true.

As true as I believe you think them false,
That give you cause to prove my saying true.

Oh if thou teach me to believe this sorrow,
Teach thou this sorrow, how to make me dye,
And let belief, and life encounter so,
As does the fury of two desperate men,
Which in the very meeting fall, and dye.
Jews marry Blaunch? O boy, then where art thou?
France friend with England, what becomes of me?
Fellow be gone: I cannot brook thy sight,
This news has made thee a most ugly man.

What other harm have I good Lady done.
But spoke the harm, that is by others done?

Which harm within it self so heinous is,
As it makes harmefull all that speak of it.

I do beseech you Madam be content.


If thou that bidst me be content, were grim
Ugly, and slandrous to thy Mothers womb,
Full of unpleasing blots, and sightlesse stains,
Lame, foolish, crooked, swart, prodigious,
Patched with foul Moles, and eye-offending marks,
I would not care, I then would be content,
For then I should not love thee: no, nor thou
Become thy great birth, nor deserve a Crown.
But thou art fair, and at thy birth (dear boy)
Nature and Fortune joined to make thee great.
Of Natures gifts, thou may with Lillies boast,
And with the halfe-blowne Rose. But Fortune, oh,
She is corrupted, changed, and won from thee*
Sh' adulterates hourly with thine Uncle John,
And with her golden hand has plucked on France
To tread down fair respect of Sovereignty,
And made his Majesty the bawd to theirs.
France is a Bawd to Fortune, and king John,
That strumpet Fortune, that usurping John:
Tell me thou fellow, is not France forsworn?
Euvenom him with words, or get thee gone,
And leave those woes alone, which I alone
Am bound to vnder-beare.

Pardon me Madam,
I may not go without you to the kings.

Thou may, thou shall, I will not go with thee,
I will instruct my sorrows to be proud,
For grief is proud, and makes his owner stoop,
To me and to the state of my great grief,
Let kings assemble: for my greefe's so great,
That no supporter but the huge firm earth
Can hold it up: here I and sorrows sit,
Here is my Throne, bid kings come bow to it.

It Is true (fair daughter) and this blessed day,
Ever in France shall be kept festival:
To solemnize this day the glorious sun
Stays in his course, and plays the Alchymist,
Turning with splendour of his precious eye
The meager cloddy earth to glittering gold:
The yearly cours^ that brings this day about,
Shall never see it, but a holy day.

A wicked day, and not a holy day.
What has this day deserved? what has it done,
That it in golden letters should be set
Among the high tides in the Calendar?
Nay, rather turn this day out of the week,
This day of shame, oppression, perjury.
Or if it must stand still, let wives with child
Pray that their burdens may not fall this day,
Lest that their hopes prodigiously be crossed:
But (on this day) let Seamen fear no wrack,
No bargains break that are not this day made;
This day all things begun, come to ill end,
Yea, faith it self to hollow falsehood change.

By heaven Lady, you shall have no cause
To curse the fair proceedings of this day:
Have I not pawned to you my Majesty?

You have beguiled me with a counterfeit
Resembling Majesty, which being touched and tried,
Proves valuelesse: you are forsworn, forsworn,
You came in Arms to spill mine enemies blood,
But now in Arms, you strengthen it with yours.
The grapling vigor, and rough frown of War
Is cold in amity, and painted peace,
And our oppression has made up this league:
Arm, arm, you heavens, against these perjured Kings,
A widow cries, be husband to me (heavens)
Let not the hours of this ungodly day
Wear out the days in Peace; but ere Sunset,
Set armed discord 'twixt these perjured Kings,
Hear me, Oh, hear me.

Lady Constance, peace.


War, war, no peace, peace is to me a war:
O Lymoges, O Austria, thou do shame
That bloody spoil: thou slave, thou wretch, you coward,
Thou little valiant, great in villainy,
Thou ever strong upon the stronger side;
Thou Fortunes Champion, that do never fight
But when her humourous Ladyship is by
To teach thee safety: thou art perjured too,
And sooth'st up greatness. What a fool art thou,
A ramping fool, to brag, and stamp, and swear,
Upon my party: thou cold blooded slave,
Have thou not spoke like thunder on my side?
Been sworn my Soldier, bidding me depend
Upon thy stars, thy fortune, and thy strength,
And do thou now fall over to my foes?
Thou wear a Lions hide, doff it for shame,
And hang a Calves skin on those recreant limbs.

O that a man should speak those words to me.


And hang a Calues-skin on those recreant limbs


Thou dare not say so villain for thy life.


And hang a Calues-skin on those recreant limbs.


We like not this, thou do forget thy self.


Here comes the holy Legate of the Pope.


Hail you anointed deputies of heaven;
To thee King John my holy errand is:
I Pandulph, of fair Millane Cardinal,
And from Pope Innocent the Legate here,
Do in his name religiously demand
Why thou against the Church, our holy Mother,
So wilfully do spurn; and force perforce
Keep Stephen Langton chosen Arshbishop
Of Canterbury from that holy Sea:
This in our foresaid holy Fathers name
Pope Innocent, I do demand of thee.

What earthie name to Interrogatories
Can taste the free breath of a sacred King?
Thou can not (Cardinal) devise a name
So slight, unworthy, and ridiculous
To charge me to an answer, as the Pope:
Tell him this tale, and from the mouth of England,
Add thus much more, that no Italian Priest
Shall tithe or toll in our dominions:
But as we, under heaven, are supreme head,
So under him that great supremacy
Where we do reign, we will alone uphold
Without the assistance of a mortal hand:
So tell the Pope, all reverence set apart
To him and his usurped authority.

Brother of England, you blaspheme in this.


Though you, and all the Kings of Christendom
Are led so grossly by this meddling Priest,
Dreading the curse that money may buy out,
And by the merit of vilde gold, dross, dust,
Purchase corrupted pardon of a man,
Who in that sale sels pardon from himself:
Though you, and all the rest so grossly led,
This iugling witchcraft with reuennue cherish,
Yet I alone, alone do me oppose
Against the Pope, and count his friends my foes.

Then by the lawful power that I have,
Thou shall stand cursed and excommunicate,
And blessed shall he be that does revolt
From his Allegiance to an heretic,
And meritorious shall that hand be called,
Canonized and worshipped as a Saint,
That takes away by any secret course
Thy hateful life.

O lawful let it be
That I have room with Rome to curse a while,
Good Father Cardinal, cry thou Amen
To my keen curses; for without my wrong
There is no tongue has power to curse him right.

There Is Law and Warrant (Lady) for my curse.


And for mine too, when Law can do no right.
Let it be lawful, that Law bar no wrong:
Law cannot give my child his kingdom here;
For he that holds his Kingdom, holds the Law:
Therefore since Law it self is perfect wrong,
How can the Law forbid my tongue to curse?

Philip of France, on peril of a curse,
Let go the hand of that Arch-heretique,
And raise the power of France upon his head,
Unless he do submit himself to Rome.

Look thou pale France? do not let go thy hand.


Look to that Devil, lest that France repent,
And by disioyning hands hell lose a soul.

King Philip, listen to the Cardinal.


And hang a Calues-skin on his recreant limbs.


Well ruffian, I must pocket up these wrongs, Because,


Your breeches best may carry them.


Philip, what say thou to the Cardinal?


What should he say, but as the Cardinal?


Bethink you father, for the difference
Is purchase of a heavy curse from Rome,
Or the light loss of England, for a friend:
Forgo the easier.

That^s the curse of Rome.


O Lewis, stand fast, the devil tempts thee here
In likeness of a new untrimmed Bride.

The Lady Constance speaks not from her faith,
But from her need.

Oh, if thou grant my need,
Which only lives but by the death of faith,
That need, must needs infer this principle,
That faith would live again by death of need:
O then tread down my need, and faith mounts up,
Keep my need up, and faith is trodden down.

The king is moud, and answers not to this.


O be removed from him, and answer well.


Do so king Philip, hang no more in doubt.


Hang nothing but a Calves skin most sweet lout.


I am perplexed, and know not what to say.


What can thou say, but will perplex thee more?
If thou stand excommunicate, and cursed?

Good reverend father, make my person yours,
And tell me how you would bestow your self?
This royal hand and mine are newly knit,
And the conjunction of our inward souls
Married in league, coupled, and linked together
With all religous strength of sacred vows,
The latest breath that gave the sound of words
Was deepe-sworne faith, peace, amity, true love
Between our kingdoms and our royal selves,
And even before this truce, but new before,
No longer then we well could wash our hands,
To clap this royal bargain up of peace,
Heaven knows they were besmeared and ouer-staind
With slaughters pencill; where revenge did paint
The fearful difference of incensed kings:
And shall these hands so lately purged of blood?
So newly joined in love? so strong in both,
Unyoke this seysure, and this kind regreete?
Play fast and loose with faith? so jest with heaven,
Make such unconstant children of our selves
As now again to snatch our palm from palm:
Vn-sweare faith sworn, and on the marriage bed
Of smiling peace to march a bloody host,
And make a riot on the gentle brow
Of true sincerity? O holy Sir
My reverend father, let it not be so;
Out of your grace, devise, ordain, impose
Some gentle order, and then we shall be blessed
To do your pleasure, and continue friends.

All form is formelesse, Order orderlesse,
Save what is opposite to Englands love.
Therefore to Arms, be Champion of our Church,
Or let the Church our mother breathe her curse,
A mothers curse, on her reuolting son:
France, thou may hold a serpent by the tongue,
A cased Lion by the mortal paw,
A fasting Tiger safer by the tooth,
Then keep in peace that hand which thou do hold.

I may dis-ioyne my hand, but not my faith.


So make thou faith an enemy to faith,
And like a civil war setst oath to oath,
Thy tongue against thy tongue. O let thy vow
First made to heaven, first be to heaven performed,
That is, to be the Champion of our Church,
What since thou sworst, is sworn against thy self,
And may not be performed by thy self,
For that which thou have sworn to do amiss,
Is not amiss when it is truly done:
And being not done, where doing tends to ill,
The truth is then most done not doing it:
The better Act of purposes mistook,
Is to mistake again, though indirect,
Yet indirection thereby grows direct,
And falsehood, falsehood cures, as fire cooles fire
Within the scorched veins of one new burned:
It is religion that does make vows kept,
But thou have sworn against religion:
By what thou swear'st against the thing thou swear'st,
And make an oath the surety for thy truth,
Against an oath the truth, thou art unsure
To swear, swears only not to be forsworn,
Else what a mockery should it be to swear?
But thou do swear, only to be forsworn,
And most forsworn, to keep what thou do swear,
Therefore thy later vows, against thy first,
Is in thy self rebellion to thy self:
And better conquest never can thou make,
Then arm thy constant and thy nobler parts
Against these giddy loose suggestions:
Upon which better part, our prayrs come in,
If thou vouchsafe them. But if not, then know
The peril of our curses light on thee
So heavy, as thou shall not shake them off
But in despair, dye under their black weight.

Rebellion, flat rebellion.


Will It not be?
Will not a Calues-skin stop that mouth of thine?

Father, to Arms.


Upon thy wedding day?
Against the blood that thou have married?
What, shall our feast be kept with slaughtered men?
Shall braying trumpets, and loud churlish drums
Clamors of hell, be measures to our pomp?
O husband hear me: aye, alack, how new
Is husband in my mouth? even for that name
Which till this time my tongue did nere pronounce;
Upon my knee I beg, go not to Arms
Against mine Uncle.

O, upon my knee made hard with kneeling,
I do pray to thee, thou virtuous Daulphin,
Alter not the doom forethought by heaven.

Now shall I see thy love, what motive may
Be stronger with thee, then the name of wife?

That which vpholdeth him, that thee vpholds,
His Honor, Oh thine Honor, Lewis thine Honor.

I muse your Majesty does seem so cold,
When such profound respects do pull you on?

I will denounce a curse upon his head.


Thou shall not need. England, I will fall from thee.


O fair return of banished Majesty.


O foul revolt of French inconstancy.


France, you shall rue this hour within this hour.


Old Time the clock setter, yt bald sexton Time:
Is it as he will? well then, France shall rue.

The Sun's orecast with blood: fair day adieu,
Which is the side that I must go withal?
I am with both, each Army h^ a hand,
And in their rage, I having hold of both,
They whurle a^under, and dismember me,
Husband, I cannot pray that thou may win:
Uncle, I needs must pray that thou may lose:
Father, I may not wish the fortune thine:
Grandam, I will not wish thy wishes thrive:
Who-euer wins, on that side shall I lose:
Assured loss, before the match be played.

Lady, with me, with me thy fortune lies.


There where my fortune lives, there my life dies.


Cosen; go draw our puisance together,
France, I am burned up with inflaming wrath,
A rage, whose heat has this condition;
That nothing can allay, nothing but blood,
The blood and dearest valued blood of France.

Thy rage shall burn thee up, and thou shall turn
To ashes, ere our blood shall quench that fire:
Look to thy self, thou art in ieopardie.

No more then he that threats. To Arms le'ts hie.


Now by my life, this day grows wondrous hot,
Some ayery Devil houers in the sky,
And pour's down mischief. Austrias head lie there,
While Philip breathes.

Hubert, keep this boy: Philip make up,
My Mother is assailed in our Tent,
And taken I fear.

My Lord I rescued her,
Her Highness is in safety, fear you not:
But on my Liege, for very little pains
Will bring this labor to an happy end.

So shall it be: your Grace shall stay behind
So strongly guarded: Cosen, look not sad,
Thy Grandame loves thee, and thy Uncle will
As dear be to thee, as thy father was.

O this will make my mother die with grief.


Cosen away for England, haste before,
And ere our coming see thou shake the bags
Of hoording Abbots, imprisoned angels
Set at liberty: the fat ribs of peace
Must by the hungry now be fed upon:
Use our Commission in his utmost force.

Bell, Book, and Candle, shall not drive me back,
When gold and silver becks me to come on*
I leave your highness: Grandame, I will pray
(If ever I remember to be holy)
For your fair safety: so I kiss your hand.

Farewell gentle Cosen.


Coz, farewell.


Come hither little kinsman, hark, a word.


Come hither Hubert. O my gentle Hubert,
We owe thee much: within this wall of flesh
There is a soul counts thee her Creditor,
And with advantage means to pay thy love:
And my good friend, thy voluntary oath
Lives in this bosom, dearly cherished.
Give me thy hand, I had a thing to say,
But I will fit it with some better tune.
By heaven Hubert, I am almost ashamed
To say what good respect I have of thee.

I am much bounden to your Majesty.


Good friend, thou have no cause to say so yet,
But thou shall have: and creep time nere so slow,
Yet it shall come, for me to do thee good.
I had a thing to say, but let it go:
The Sun is in the heaven, and the proud day,
Attended with the pleasures of the world,
Is all too wanton, and too full of gawdes
To give me audience: If the midnight bell
Did with his iron tongue, and brazen mouth
Sound on into the drowzie race of night:
If this same were a Churchyard where we stand,
And thou possessed with a thousand wrongs:
Or if that surly spirit melancholy
Had baked thy blood, and made it heavy, thick,
Which else runs tickling up and down the veins,
Making that idiot laughter keep men's eyes,
And strain their cheeks to idle merriment,
A passion hateful to my purposes:
Or if that thou could see me without eyes,
Hear me without thine ears, and make reply
Without a tongue, using conceit alone,
Without eyes, ears, and harmefull sound of words:
Then, in despite of brooded watchful day,
I would into thy bosom pour my thoughts:
But (ah) I will not, yet I love thee well,
And by my troth I think thou love me well.

So well, that what you bid me undertake,
Though that my death were adiunct to my Act,
By heaven I would do it.

Do not I know thou would?
Good Hubert, Hubert, Hubert throw thine eye
On you young boy: I Will tell thee what my friend,
He is a very serpent in my way,
And wheresoere this foot of mine does tread,
He lies before me: do thou understand me?
Thou art his keeper.

And I Will keep him so,
That he shall not offend your Majesty.

Death.


My Lord.


A Grave.


He shall not live.


Enough.
I could be merry now, Hubert, I love thee.
Well, I Will not say what I intend for thee:
Remember: Madam, Fare you well,
I Will send those powers over to your Majesty.

My blessing go with thee.


For England Cosen, go.
Hubert shall be your man, attend on you
Withal true duty: On toward Callice, hoa.

So by a roaring Tempest on the flood,
A whole Armado of convicted sail
Is scattered and dis-ioyn'd from fellowship.

Courage and comfort, all shall yet go well.


What can go well, when we have run so ill?
Are we not beaten? Is not Angiers lost?
Arthur taken prisoner? diverse dear friends slain?
And bloody England into England gone,
Ore-bearing interruption spite of France?

What he has won, that has he fortified:
So hot a speed, with such advice disposed,
Such temperate order in so fierce a cause,
Does want example: who has read, or heard
Of any kindred-action like to this?

Well could I bear that England had this praise,
So we could find some pattern of our shame:
Look who comes here? a grave unto a soul,
Holding the eternal spirit against her will,
In the vilde prison of afflicted breath:
I prithee Lady go away with me.

Lo; now: now see the issue of your peace.


Patience good Lady, comfort gentle Constance.


No, I defy all Counsel, all redress,
But that which ends all counsel, true Redress:
Death, death, O amiable, lovely death,
Thou odoriferous stench: sound rottenness,
Arise forth from the couch of lasting night,
Thou hate and terror to prosperity,
And I will kiss thy detestable bones,
And put my eye balls in thy vaultie brows,
And ring these fingers with thy household worms,
And stop this gap of breath with fulsome dust,
And be a Carrion Monster like thy self;
Come, grin on me, and I will think thou smil'st,
And busse thee as thy wife: Miseries Love,
O come to me.

O fair affliction, peace.


No, no, I will not, having breath to cry:
O that my tongue were in the thunders mouth,
Then with a passion would I shake the world,
And rowze from sleep that fell Anatomy
Which cannot hear a Ladies feeble voice,
Which scorns a modern Invocation.

Lady, you utter madness, and not sorrow.


Thou art holy to belie me so,
I am not mad: this hair I tear is mine,
My name is Constance, I was G^ffreyes wife,
Young Arthur is my son, and he is lost:
I am not mad, I would to heaven I were,
For then it is like I should forget my self:
O, if I could, what grief should I forget?
Preach some Philosophy to make me mad,
And thou shall be Canonized (Cardinal.)
For, being not mad, but sensible of grief,
My reasonable part produces reason
How I may be delivered of these woes,
And teaches me to kill or hang my self:
If I were mad, I should forget my son,
Or madly think a babe of clowes were he:
I am not mad: too well, too well I feel
The different plague of each calamity.

Bind up those tresses: O what love I note
In the fair multitude of those her hairs;
Where but by chance a silver drop has fallen,
Even to that drop ten thousand wiery fiends
Do glue themselves in sociable grief,
Like true, inseparable, faithful loves,
Sticking together in calamity.

To England, if you will.


Bind up your hairs.


Yes that I will: and wherefore will I do it?
I tore them from their bonds, and cride aloud,
O, that these hands could so redeem my son,
As they have given these hayres their liberty:
But now I envy at their liberty,
And will again commit them to their bonds,
Because my poor child is a prisoner.
And Father Cardinal, I have heard you say
That we shall see and know our friends in heaven:
If that be true, I shall see my boy again;
For since the birth of Caine, the first male-childe
To him that did but yesterday suspire,
There was not such a gracious creature borne:
But now will Canker-sorrow eat my bud,
And chase the native beauty from his cheek,
And he will look as hollow as a Ghost,
As dim and meager as an Agues fit,
And so he will dye: and rising so again,
When I shall meet him in the Court of heaven
I shall not know him: therefore never, never
Must I behold my pretty Arthur more.

You hold too heinous a respect of grief.


He talks to me, that never had a son.


You are as fond of grief, as of your child.


Grief fills the room up of my absent child:
Lies in his bed, walks up and down with me,
Puts on his pretty looks, repeats his words,
Remembets me of all his gracious parts,
Stuffes out his vacant garments with his form;
Then, have I reason to be fond of grief?
Fareyouwell: had you such a loss as I,
I could give better comfort then you do.
I will not keep this form upon my head,
When there is such disorder in my wit:
O Lord, my boy, my Arthur, my fair son,
My life, my joy, my food, my all the world:
My widow-comfort, and my sorrows cure.

I fear some outrage, and I Will follow her.


There Is nothing in this world can make me joy,
Life is as tedious as a twice-told tale,
Vexing the dull ear of a drowsy man;
And bitter shame has spoiled the sweet words taste,
That it yields naught but shame and bitterness.

Before the curing of a strong disease,
Even in the instant of repair and health,
The fit is strongest: Evils that take leave.
On their departure, most of all show evil*
What have you lost by losing of this day?

All days of glory, joy and happiness.


If you had won it, certainly you had.
No, no: when Fortune means to men most good,
She looks upon them with a threatening eye:
It Is strange to think how much King John has lost
In this which he accounts so clearly won:
Are not you grieved that Arthur is his prisoner?

As heartily as he is glad he has him.


Your mind is all as youthful as your blood.
Now hear me speak with a propheticke spirit:
For even the breath of what I mean to speak,
Shall blow each dust, each straw, each little rub
Out of the path which shall directly lead
Thy foot to Englands Throne. And therefore mark:
John has seized Arthur, and it cannot be,
That whiles warm life plays in that infants veins,
The mis-plac'd- John should entertain an hour,
One minute, nay one quiet breath of rest.
A Scepter snatched with an unruly hand,
Must be as boysterously maintained as gained.
And he that stands upon a slippery place,
Makes nice of no vilde hold to stay him up:
That John may stand, then Arthur needs must fall;
So be it, for it cannot be but so.

But what shall I gain by young Arthurs fall?


You, in the right of Lady Blanch your wife,
May then make all the claim that Arthur did.

And loose it, life and all, as Arthur did.


How green you are and fresh in this old world?
John lays you plots: the times conspire with you,
For he that steepes his safety in true blood,
Shall find but bloody safety, and untrue.
This Act so euilly borne shall cool the hearts
Of all his people, and freeze up their zeal,
That none so small advantage shall step forth
To check his reign, but they will cherish it.
No natural exhalation in the sky,
No scope of Nature, no distempered day,
No common wind, no customed event,
But they will pluck away his natural cause,
And call them Meteors, prodigies, and signs,
Abbortiues, presages, and tongues of heaven,
Plainly denouncing vengeance upon John.

May be he will not touch young Arthurs life,
But hold himself safe in his prisonment.

O Sir, when he shall hear of your approach,
If that young Arthur be not gone already,
Even at that news he dies: and then the hearts
Of all his people shall revolt from him,
And kiss the lips of unacquainted change,
And pick strong matter of revolt, and wrath
Out of the bloody fingers ends of John.
Me thinks I see this hurley all on foot;
And O, what better matter breeds for you,
Then I have named. The Bastard Falconbridge
Is now in England ransacking the Church,
Offending Charity: If but a dozen French
Were there in Arms, they would be as a Call
To train ten thousand English to their side;
Or, as a little snow, tumbled about,
Anon becomes a Mountain. O noble Dolphine,
Go with me to the King, it is wonderful,
What may be wrought out of their discontent,
Now that their souls are topfull of offense,
For England go; I will whet on the King.

Strong reasons makes strange actions: let us go,
If you say I, the King will not say no.

Heat me these Irons hot, and look thou stand
Within the Arras: when I strike my foot
Upon the bosom of the ground, rush forth
And bind the boy, which you shall find with me
Fast to the chair: be heedfull: hence, and watch.

I hope your warrant will bear out the deed.


Uncleanly scruples fear not you: look to it.
Young Lad come forth; I have to say with you.

Good morrow Hubert.


Good morrow; little Prince.


As little Prince, having so great a Title
To be more Prince, as may be: you are sad.

Indeed I have been merrier.


Mercy on me:
Me thinks no body should be sad but I:
Yet I remember, when I was in France,
Young Gentlemen would be as sad as night
Only for wantonness: by my Christendom,
So I were out of prison, and kept Sheep
I should be as merry as the day is long:
And so I would be here, but that I doubt
My Uncle practices more harm to me:
He is afraid of me, and I of him:
Is it my fault, that I was Geffreyes son?
No in deed is it not: and I would to heaven
I were your son, so you would love me, Hubert:

If I talk to him, with his innocent prate
He will awake my mercy, which lies dead:
Therefore I will be sudden, and dispatch.

Are you sick Hubert? you look pale to day,
Insooth I would you were a little sick,
That I might sit all night, and watch with you.
I warrant I love you more then you do me.

His words do take possession of my bosom.
Read here young Arthur. How now foolish rheum?
Turning dispitious torture out of door?
I must be brief, least resolution drop
Out at mine eyes, in tender womanish tears.
Can you not read it? Is it not fair writ?

Too fairly Hubert, for so foul effect,
Must you with hot Irons, burn out both mine eyes?

Young Boy, I must.


And will you?


And I will.


Have you the heart? When your head did but ache,
I knit my ^and-kercher about your brows
(The best I had, a Princess wrought it me)
And I did never ask it you again:
And with my hand, at midnight held your head;
And like the watchful minutes, to the hour,
Still and anon cheered up the heavy time;
Saying, what lack you? and where lies your grief?
Or what good love may I perform for you?
Many a poor man's son would have lain still,
And nere have spoke a loving word to you:
But you, at your sick service had a Prince:
Nay, you may think my love was crafty love,
And call it cunning. Do, and if you will,
If heaven be pleased that you must use me ill,
Why then you must. Will you put out mine eyes?
These eyes, that never did, nor never shall
So much as frown on you.

I have sworn to do it:
And with hot Irons must I burn them out.

Ah, none but in this Iron Age, would do it:
The Iron of it self, though heat red hot,
Approaching near these eyes, would drink my tears,
And quench this fiery indignation,
Even in the matter of mine innocence:
Nay, after that, consume away in rust,
But for containing fire to harm mine eye:
Are you more stubborn hard, then hammered Iron?
And if an Angel should have come to me,
And told me Hubert should put out mine eyes,
I would not have believed him: no tongue but Huberts.

Come forth: Do as I bid you do.


O save me Hubert, save me: my eyes are out
Even with the fierce looks of these bloody men.

Give me the Iron I say, and bind him here.


Alas, what need you be so boistrous rough?
I will not struggle, I will stand stone still:
For heaven sake Hubert let me not be bound:
Nay hear me Hubert, drive these men away,
And I will sit as quiet as a Lamb.
I will not stir, nor winch, nor speak a word,
Nor look upon the Iron angerly:
Thrust but these men away, and I Will forgive you,
What ever torment you do put me too.

Go stand within: let me alone with him.


I am best pleased to be from such a deed.


Alas, I then have chid away my friend,
He has a stern look, but a gentle heart:
Let him come back, that his compassion may
Give life to yours.

Come (Boy) prepare your self.


Is there no remedy?


None, but to lose your eyes.


O heaven: that there were but a moth in yours,
A grain, a dust, a gnat, a wandering hair,
Any annoyance in that precious sense:
Then feeling what small things are boisterous there,
Your vilde intent must needs seem horrible.

Is this your promise? Go too, hold your tongue


Hubert, the utterance of a brace of tongues,
Must needs want pleading for a pair of eyes:
Let me not hold my tongue: let me not Hubert,
Or Hubert, if you will cut out my tongue,
So I may keep mine eyes. O spare mine eyes,
Though to no use, but still to look on you.
Lo, by my troth, the Instrument is cold,
And would not harm me.

I can heat it, Boy.


No, in good sooth: the fire is dead with grief,
Being create for comfort, to be used
In undeserved extremes: See else your self,
There is no malice in this burning cole,
The breath of heaven, has blown his spirit out,
And strewn repentant ashes on his head.

But with my breath I can revive it Boy.


And if you do, you will but make it blush,
And glow with shame of your proceedings, Hubert:
Nay, it perchance will sparkle in your eyes:
And, like a dog that is compelled to fight,
Snatch at his Master that does carre him on.
All things that you should use to do me wrong
Deny their office: only you do lack
That mercy, which fierce fire, and Iron extends,
Creatures of note for mercy, lacking uses.

Well, see to live: I will not touch thine eye,
For all the Treasure that thine Uncle owes,
Yet am I sworn, and I did purpose, Boy,
With this same very Iron, to burn them out.

O now you look like Hubert. All this while
You were disguised.

Peace: no more. Adieu,
Your Uncle must not know but you are dead.
I Will fill these dogged Spies with false reports:
And, pretty child, sleep doubtless, and secure,
That Hubert for the wealth of all the world,
Will not offend thee.

O heaven! I thank you Hubert.


Silence, no more; go closely in with me,
Much danger do I undergo for thee.

Here once again we sit: once against crowned
And looked upon, I hope, with cheerful eyes.

This once again (but that your Highness pleased)
Was once superfluous: you were Crowned before,
And that high Royalty was nere plucked off:
The faiths of men, nere stained with revolt:
Fresh expectation troubled not the Land
With any long'd-for-change, or better State.

Therefore, to be possessed with double pomp,
To guard a Title, that was rich before;
To gilde refined Gold, to paint the Lilly;
To throw a perfume on the Violet,
To smooth the ye, or add another hew
Unto the Rainbow; or with Taper-Light
To seek the beauteous eye of heaven to garnish,
Is wastefull, and ridiculous excess.

But that your Royal pleasure must be done,
This act, is as an ancient tale new told,
And, in the last repeating, troublesome,
Being urged at a time unseasonable.

In this the Anticke, and well noted face
Of plain old form, is much disfigured,
And like a shifted wind unto a sail,
It makes the course of thoughts to fetch about,
Startles, and frights consideration:
Makes sound opinion sick, and truth suspected,
For putting on so new a fashioned robe.

When Workmen strive to do better then well,
They do confound their skill in covetousness,
And oftentimes excusing of a fault,
Does make the fault the worse by the excuse:
As patches set upon a little breach,
Discredit more in hiding of the fault,
Then did the fault before it was so patched.

To this effect, before you were new crowned
We breathed our Council: but it pleased your Highness
To ouer-beare it, and we are all well pleased,
Since all, and every part of what we would
Does make a stand, at what your Highness will.

Some reasons of this double Corronation
I have possessed you with, and think them strong.
And more, more strong, then lesser is my fear
I shall indue you with: Mean time, but ask
What you would have reformed* that is not well,
And well shall you perceive, how willingly
I will both hear, and grant you your requests.

Then I, as one that am the tongue of these
To sound the purposes of all their hearts,
Both for my self, and them: but chief of all
Your safety: for the which, my self and them
Bend their best studies, heartily request
The infranchisement of Arthur, whose restraint
Does move the murmuring lips of discontent
To break into this dangerous argument.
If what in rest you have, in right you hold,
Why then your fears, which (as they say) attend
The steps of wrong, should move you to mew up
Your tender kinsman, and to choke his days
With barbarous ignorance, and deny his youth
The rich advantage of good exercise,
That the times enemies may not have this
To grace occasions: let it be our suite,
That you have bid us ask his liberty,
Which for our goods, we do no further ask,
Then, whereupon our weal on you depending,
Counts it your weal: he have his liberty.

Let it be so: I do commit his youth
To your direction: Hubert, what news with you?

This is the man should do the bloody deed:
He showed his warrant to a friend of mine,
The image of a wicked heinous fault
Lives in his eye: that close aspect of his,
Do show the mood of a much troubled breast,
And I do fearfully believe it is done,
What we so feared he had a charge to do.

The color of the King does come, and go
Between his purpose and his conscience,
Like Heralds 'twixt two dreadful battles set:
His passion is so ripe, it needs must break.

And when it breaks, I fear will issue thence
The foul corruption of a sweet childs death.

We cannot hold mortalities strong hand.
Good Lords, although my will to give, is living,
The suite which you demand is gone, and dead.
He tells us Arthur is deceased to night.

Indeed we feared his sickness was past cure.


Indeed we heard how near his death he was,
Before the child himself felt he was sick:
This must be answered either here, or hence.

Why do you bend such solemn brows on me?
Think you I bear the Sheeres of destiny?
Have I commandment on the pulse of life?

It is apparent foule-play, and it is shame
That Greatness should so grossly offer it;
So thrive it in your game, and so farewell.

Stay yet (Lord Salisbury) I Will go with thee,
And find the inheritance of this poor child,
His little kingdom of a forced grave.
That blood which owed the breadth of all this I Will,
Three foot of it does hold; bad world the while:
This must not be thus borne, this will break out
To all our sorrows, and ere long I doubt.

They burn in indignation: I repent:
There is no sure foundation set on blood:
No certain life atchieu'd by others death:
A fearful eye thou have. Where is that blood,
That I have seen inhabit in those cheeks?
So foul a sky, cleeres not without a storm,
Pour down thy weather: how goes all in France?

From France to England, never such a power
For any foreign preparation,
Was levied in the body of a land.
The Copy of your speed is learned by them:
For when you should be told they do prepare,
The tidings comes, that they are all arrived.

Oh where has our Intelligence bin drunk?
Where has it slept? Where is my Mothers care?
That such an Army could be drawn in France,
And she not hear of it?

My Liege, her ear
Is stopped with dust: the first of April di'de
Your noble mother; and as I hear, my Lord,
The Lady Constance in a frenzy di'de
Three days before: but this from Rumors tongue
I idely heard: if true, or false I know not.

Withold thy speed, dreadful Occasion:
O make a league with me, 'till I have pleased
My discontented Peers. What? Mother dead?
How wildely then walks my Estate in France?
Under whose conduct came those powers of France,
That thou for truth give out are landed here?

Under the Dolphin.


Thou have made me giddy
With these ill tidings: Now? What says the world
To your proceedings? Do not seek to stuff
My head with more ill news: for it is full.

But if you be a-feard to hear the worst,
Then let the worst vn-heard, fall on your head.

Bear with me Cosen, for I was amazed
Under the tide; but now I breath again
Aloft the flood, and can give audience
To any tongue, speak it of what it will.

How I have sped among the Clergy men,
The sums I have collected shall express:
But as I trauail'd hither through the land,
I find the people strangely fantasied,
Possessed with rumors, full of idle dreams,
Not knowing what they fear, but full of fear.
And here is a Prophet that I brought with me
From forth the streets of Pomfret, whom I found
With many hundreds treading on his heels:
To whom he sung in rude harsh sounding rimes,
That ere the next Ascension day at noone,
Your Highness should deliver up your Crown.

Thou idle Dreamer, wherefore did thou so?


Fore-knowing that the truth will fall out so.


Hubert, away with him: imprison him,
And on that day at noone, whereon he says
I shall yield up my Crown, let him be hanged.
Deliver him to safety, and return,
For I must use thee. O my gentle Cosen,
Hear'st thou the news abroad, who are arrived?

The French (my Lord) men's mouths are full of it:
Besides I met Lord Bigot, and Lord Salisburie
With eyes as red as new enkindled fire,
And others more, going to seek the grave
Of Arthur, whom they say is killed to night, on your suggestion.

Gentle kinsman, go
And thrust thy self into their Companies,
I have a way to win their loves again:
Bring them before me.

I will seek them out.


Nay, but make haste: the better foot before.
O, let me have no subject enemies,
When adverse Forreyners affright my Towns
With dreadful pomp of stout invasion.
Be Mercury, set feathers to thy heels,
And fly (like thought) from them, to me again.

The spirit of the time shall teach me speed.


Spoke like a sprightfull Noble Gentleman.
Go after him: for he perhaps shall need
Some Messenger betwixt me, and the Peers,
And be thou he.

With all my heart, my Liege.


My mother dead?


My Lord, they say five Moons were seen to night:
Four fixed, and the fifth did whirle about
The other four, in wondrous motion.

Five Moons?


Old men, and Beldames, in the streets
Do prophecy upon it dangerously:
Young Arthurs death is common in their mouths,
And when they talk of him, they shake their heads,
And whisper one another in the ear.
And he that speaks, does gripe the hearers wrist,
Whilst he that hears, makes fearful action
With wrinkled brows, with nods, with rolling eyes.
I saw a Smith stand with his hammer (thus)
The whilst his Iron did on the Anuile cool,
With open mouth swallowing a Tailors news,
Who with his Sheeres, and Measure in his hand,
Standing on slippers, which his nimble haste
Had falsely thrust upon contrary feet,
Told of a many thousand warlike French,
That were embattailed, and ranked in Kent.
Another lean, vnwash'd Artificer,
Cuts off his tale, and talks of Arthurs death.

Why seek'st thou to possess me with these fears?
Why vrgest thou so often young Arthurs death?
Thy hand has murdered him: I had a mighty cause
To wish him dead, but thou had none to kill him.

No had (my Lord?) why, did you not provoke me?


It is the curse of Kings, to be attended
By slaves, that take their humors for a warrant,
To break within the bloody house of life,
And on the winking of Authority
To understand a Law; to know the meaning
Of dangerous Majesty, when perchance it frowns
More upon humor, then advised respect.

Here is your hand and Seal for what I did.


Oh, when the last account twixt heaven and earth
Is to be made, then shall this hand and Seal
Witness against us to damnation.
How often the sight of means to do ill deeds,
Make deeds ill done? Had not thou been by,
A fellow by the hand of Nature marked,
Quoted, and signed to do a deed of shame,
This murder had not come into my mind.
But taking note of thy abhorred Aspect,
Finding thee fit for bloody villainy:
Apt, liable to be employed in danger,
I faintly broke with thee of Arthurs death:
And thou, to be endeered to a King,
Made it no conscience to destroy a Prince.

My Lord.


Had thou but shook thy head, or made a pause
When I spoke darkely, what I purposed:
Or turned an eye of doubt upon my face;
As bid me tell my tale in express words:
Deep shame had struck me dumb, made me break off,
And those thy fears, might have wrought fears in me.
But, thou did understand me by my signs,
And did in signs again parley with sin,
Yea, without stop, did let thy heart consent,
And consequently, thy rude hand to act
The deed, which both our tongues held vilde to name.
Out of my sight, and never see me more:
My Nobles leave me, and my State is braued,
Even at my gates, with ranks of foreign powers;
Nay, in the body of this fleshly Land,
This kingdom, this Confine of blood, and breathe
Hostility, and civil tumult reigns
Between my conscience, and my Cosins death.

Arm you against your other enemies:
I Will make a peace between your soul, and you.
Young Arthur is alive: This hand of mine
Is yet a maiden, and an innocent hand.
Not painted with the Crimson spots of blood,
Within this bosom, never entered yet
The dreadful motion of a murderous thought,
And you have slandered Nature in my form,
Which howsoever rude exteriorly,
Is yet the cover of a fayrer mind,
Then to be butcher of an innocent child.

Does Arthur live? O have thee to the Peers,
Throw this report on their incensed rage,
And make them tame to their obedience.
Forgive the Comment that my passion made
Upon thy feature, for my rage was blind,
And foul immaginarie eyes of blood
Presented thee more hideous then thou art.
Oh, answer not; but to my Closset bring*
The angry Lords, with all expedient have,
I conjure thee but slowly: run more fast.

The Wall is high, and yet will I leap down.
Good ground be pitiful, and hurt me not:
There Is few or none do know me, if they did,
This Ship-boyes semblance has disguised me quite.
I am afraid, and yet I Will venture it.
If I get down, and do not break my limbs,
I Will find a thousand shifts to get away;
As good to dye, and go; as dye, and stay.
Oh me, my Uncles spirit is in these stones,
Heaven take my soul, and England keep my bones.

Lords, I will meet him at S. Edmondsbury,
It is our safety, and we must embrace
This gentle offer of the perilous time.

Who brought that Letter from the Cardinal?


The Count Meloone, a Noble Lord of France,
Whose private with me of the Dolphines love,
Is much more general, then these lines import.

To morrow morning let us meet him then.


Or rather then set forward, for 'twill be
Two long days journey (Lords) or ere we meet.

Once more to day well met, distempered Lords,
The King by me requests your presence straight.

The king has dispossessed himself of us,
We will not line his thin-bestained cloak*
With our pure Honors: nor attend the foot.
That leaves the print of blood where ere it walks.
Return, and tell him so: we know the worst.

What ere you think, good words I think were best.


Our greefes, and not our manners reason now.


But there is little reason in your grief.
Therefore 'twere reason you had manners now.

Sir, sir, impatience has his privilege.


It Is true, to hurt his master, no man's else.


This is the prison: What is he lies here?


Oh death, made proud with pure and princely beuty,
The earth had not a hole to hide this deed.

Murder, as hating what himself has done,
Does lay it open to urge on revenge.

Or when he doomed this Beauty to a grave,
Found it too precious Princely, for a grave.

Sir Richard, what think you? you have beheld,
Or have you read, or heard, or could you think?
Or do you almost think, although you see,
That you do see? Could thought, without this object
Form such another? This is the very top,
The height, the Crest: or Crest unto the Crest
Of murders Arms: This is the bloodiest shame,
The wildest Sa^agery, the vildest stroke
That ever wall-ey'd wrath, or staring rage
Presented to the tears of soft remorse.

All murders past, do stand excused in this:
And this so sole, and so vnmatcheable,
Shall give a holiness, a purity,
To the yet unbegotten sin of times;
And prove a deadly bloodshed, but a jest,
Exampled by this heinous spectacle.

It is a damned, and a bloody work,
The graceless action of a heavy hand,
If that it be the work of any hand.

If that it be the work of any hand?
We had a kind of light, what would ensue:
It is the shameful work of Huberts hand,
The practice, and the purpose of the king:
From whose obedience I forbid my soul,
Kneeling before this ruin of sweet life,
And breathing to his breathless Excellence
The Incense of a Vow, a holy Vow:
Never to taste the pleasures of the world,
Never to be infected with delight,
Nor conversant with Ease, and Idleness,
Till I have set a glory to this hand,
By giving it the worship of Revenge.

Our souls religiously confirm thy words.


Lords, I am hot with haste, in seeking you,
Arthur does live, the king has sent for you.

Oh he is bold, and blushes not at death,
Auant thou hateful villain, get thee gone.

I am no villain.


Must I rob the Law?


Your sword is bright sir, put it up again.


Not till I sheath it in a murderers skin.


Stand back Lord Salsbury, stand back I say.
By heaven, I think my sword's as sharp as yours.
I would not have you (Lord) forget your self,
Nor tempt the danger of my true defense;
Least I, by marking of your rage, forget your Worth, your Greatness, and
Nobility

Out dunghill: dare thou brave a Nobleman?


Not for my life: But yet I dare defend
My innocent life against an Emperor.

Thou art a Murderer.

Do not prove me so:
Yet I am none. Whose tongue so ere speaks false,
Not truly speaks: who speaks not truly, Lies.

Cut him to pieces.


Keep the peace, I say.


Stand by, or I shall gaul you Faulconbridge.


Thou were better gaul the devil Salsbury.
If thou but frown on me, or stir thy foot,
Or teach thy hasty spleen to do me shame,
I Will strike thee dead. Put up thy sword betime,
Or I Will so maule you, and your tosting-Iron,
That you shall think the devil is come from hell.

What will thou do, renowned Faulconbridge?
Second a Villain, and a Murderer?

Lord Bigot, I am none.


Who killed this Prince?


It Is not an hour since I left him well:
I honored him, I loved him, and will weep
My date of life out, for his sweet lives loss.

Trust not those cunning waters of his eyes,
For villainy is not without such rheum,
And he, long traded in it, makes it seem
Like Rivers of remorse and innocence.
Away with me, all you whose souls abhor
The uncleanly savors of a Slaughterhouse,
For I am stifled with this smell of sin.

Away, toward Bury, to the Dolphin there.


There tell the king, he may inquire us out.

Here Is a good world: knew you of this fair work?
Beyond the infinite and boundless reach of mercy,
(If thou did this deed of death) art you damned Hubert.

Do but hear me sir.


Ha? I Will tell thee what.
You Are damned as black, nay nothing is so black,
Thou art more deep damned then Prince Lucifer:
There is not yet so ugly a fiend of hell
As thou shall be, if thou did kill this child.

Upon my soul.


If thou did but consent
To this most cruel Act: do but despair,
And if thou want a Cord, the smallest thread
That ever Spider twisted from her womb
Will serve to strangle thee: A rush will be a beam
To hang thee on. Or would thou drown thy self,
Put but a little water in a spoone,
And it shall be as all the Ocean,
Enough to stifle such a villain up.
I do suspect thee very grievously.

If I in act, consent, or sin of thought,
Be guilty of the stealing that sweet breath
Which was embounded in this beauteous clay,
Let hell want pains enough to torture me:
I left him well.

Go, bear him in thine arms: am amazed me thinks, and loose my way
Among the thorns, and dangers of this world*
How easy do thou take all England up,
From forth this morcell of dead Royalty?
The life, the right, and truth of all this Realm
Is fled to heaven: and England now is left
To tug and scamble, and to part by the teeth
The vn-owed interest of proud swelling State:
Now for the bare-pickt bone of Majesty,
Does dogged war bristle his angry crest,
And snarleth in the gentle eyes of peace:
Now* Powers from home, and discontents at home
Meet in one line: and vast confusion waits
As does a Raven on a sicke-falne beast,
The iminent decay of wrested pomp.
Now happy he, whose cloak and center can
Hold out this tempest. Bear away that child,
And follow me with speed: I Will to the King:
A thousand businesses are brief in hand,
And heaven it self does frown upon the Land.

Thus have I yielded up into your hand
The Circle of my glory.

Take again
From this my hand, as holding of the Pope
Your Sovereign greatness and authority.

Now keep your holy word, go meet the French,
And from his holiness use all your power
To stop their marches before we are enflamed:
Our discontented Counties do revolt:
Our people quarrel with obedience,
Swearing Allegiance, and the love of soul
To stranger-bloud, to for^en Royalty;
This inundation of mistempred humor,
Rests by you only to be qualified.
Then pause not: for the present time's so sick,
That present medcine must be ministered,
Or overthrow incureable ensues.

It was my breath that blew this Tempest up,
Upon your stubborn usage of the Pope:
But since you are a gentle conuertite,
My tongue shall hush again this storm of war,
And make fair weather in your blustering land:
On this Ascension day, remember well,
Upon your oath of service to the Pope,
Go I to make the French lay down their Arms.

Is this Ascension day: did not the Prophet
Say, that before Ascension day at noone,
My Crown I should give off? even so I have:
I did suppose it should be on constraint,
But (heaven be thanked) it is but voluntary.

All Kent has yielded: nothing there holds out
But Dover Castle: London has received
Like a kind Host, the Dolphin and his powers.
Your Nobles will not hear you, but are gone
To offer service to your enemy:
And wild amazement hurries up and down
The little number of your doubtful friends.

Would not my Lords return to me again
After they heard young Arthur was alive?

They found him dead, and cast into the streets,
An empty Casket, where the Jewel of life
By some damned hand was robbed, and taken away.

That villain Hubert told me he did live.


So on my soul he did, for ought he knew:
But wherefore do you droope? why look you sad?
Be great in act, as you have been in thought:
Let not the world see fear and sad distrust
Govern the motion of a kinglye eye:
Be stirring as the time, be fire with fire,
Threaten the threatner, and outface the brow
Of bragging horror: So shall inferior eyes
That borrow their behauiours from the great,
Grow great by your example, and put on
The dauntlesse spirit of resolution.
Away, and glister like the god of war
When he intends to become the field:
Show boldness and aspiring confidence:
What, shall they seek the Lion in his den,
And fright him there? and make him tremble there?
Oh let it not be said: forage, and run
To meet displeasure farther from the doors,
And grapple with him ere he come so nigh.

The Legate of the Pope has been with me,
And I have made a happy peace with him,
And he has promised to dismiss the Powers
Led by the Dolphin.

Oh inglorious league:
Shall we upon the footing of our land,
Send fayre-play-orders, and make comprimise,
Insinuation, parley, and base truce
To Arms Inuasiue? Shall a beardlesse boy,
A cockred-silken wanton brave our fields,
And flesh his spirit in a warre-like soil,
Mocking the air with colors idly spread,
And find no check? Let us my Liege to Arms:
Perchance the Cardinal cannot make your peace;
Or if he do, let it at least be said
They saw we had a purpose of defense.

Have thou the ordering of this present time.


Away then with good courage: yet I know
Our Party may well meet a prowder foe.

My Lord Melloone, let this be coppied out,
And keep it safe for our remembrance:
Return the president to these Lords again,
That having our fair order written down,
Both they and we, perusing ore these notes
May know wherefore we took the Sacrament,
And keep our faithes firm and inviolable.

Upon our sides it never shall be broken.
And Noble Dolphin, albeit we swear
A voluntary zeal, and an vn-urg'd Faith
To your proceedings: yet believe me Prince,
I am not glad that such a sore of Time
Should seek a plaster by contemned revolt,
And heal the inueterate Canker of one wound,
By making many: Oh it grieves my soul,
That I must draw this mettle from my side
To be a widdow-maker: oh, and there
Where honorable rescue, and defense
Cries out upon the name of Salisbury.
But such is the infection of the time,
That for the health and Physic of our right,
We cannot deal but with the very hand
Of stern Injustice, and confused wrong:
And is it not pity, (oh my grieved friends)
That we, the sons and children of this Isle,
Was borne to see so sad an hour as this,
Wherein we step after a stranger, march
Upon her gentle bosom, and fill up
Her Enemies ranks? I must withdraw, and weep
Upon the spot of this enforced cause,
To grace the Gentry of a Land remote,
And follow unacquainted colors here:
What here? O Nation that thou could remove,
That Neptunes Arms who clippeth thee about,
Would bear thee from the knowledge of thy self,
And cripple thee unto a Pagan shore,
Where these two Christian Armies might combine
The blood of malice, in a vain of league,
And not to spend it so vn-neighbourly.

A noble temper do thou show in this,
And great affections wrestling in thy bosom
Does make an earthquake of Nobility:
Oh, what a noble combat have fought
Between compulsion, and a brave respect:
Let me wipe off this honorable dew,
That siluerly does progress on thy cheeks:
My heart has melted at a Ladies tears,
Being an ordinary Inundation:
But this effusion of such manly drops,
This shower, blown up by tempest of the soul,
Startles mine eyes, and makes me more amazed
Then had I seen the vaultie top of heaven
Figured quite ore wirh burning Meteors.
Lift up thy brow (renowned Salisburie)
And with a great heart heave away this storm:
Commend these waters to those baby-eyes
That never saw the giant-world enraged,
Nor met with Fortune, other then at feasts,
Full warm of blood, of mirth, of gossipping:
Come, come; for thou shall thrust thy hand as deep
Into the purse of rich prosperity
As Lewis himself: so (Nobles) shall you all,
That knit your sinews to the strength of mine.
And even there, methinkes an Angel spoke,
Look where the holy Legate comes apace,
To give us warrant from the hand of heaven,
And on our actions set the name of right
With holy breath.

Hail noble Prince of France:
The next is this: King John has reconciled
Himself to Rome, his spirit is come in,
That so stood out against the holy Church,
The great Metropolis and Sea of Rome:
Therefore thy threatening Colors now wind up,
And tame the savage spirit of wild war,
That like a Lion fostered up at hand,
It may lie gently at the foot of peace.
And be no further harmefull then in show.

Your Grace shall pardon me, I will not back:
I am too high-borne to be proportied
To be a secondary at control,
Or useful seruing-man, and Instrument
To any Sovereign State throughout the world.
Your breath first kindled the dead coal of wars,
Between this chastised kingdom and my self,
And brought in matter that should feed this fire;
And now it is far too huge to be blown out
With that same weak wind, which enkindled it:
You taught me how to know the face of right,
Acquainted me with interest to this Land,
Yea, thrust this enterprise into my heart,
And come ye now to tell me John has made
His peace with Rome? what is that peace to me?
I (by the honor of my marriage bed)
After young Arthur, claim this Land for mine,
And now it is half conquered, must I back,
Because that John has made his peace with Rome?
Am I Romes slave? What penny has Rome borne?
What men provided? What munition sent
To underprop this Action? Is It not I
That undergo this charge? Who else but I,
And such as to my claim are liable,
Sweat in this business, and maintain this war?
Have I not heard these Islanders shout out
Viue le Roy; as I have bank'd their Towns?
Have I not here the best Cards for the game
To win this easy match, played for a Crown?
And shall I now give ore the yielded Set?
No, no, on my soul it never shall be said.

You look but on the outside of this work.


Outside or inside, I will not return
Till my attempt so much be glorified,
As to my ample hope was promised,
Before I drew this gallant head of war,
And culled these fiery spirits from the world
To out-looke Conquest, and to win renown
Even in the jaws of danger, and of death:
What lusty Trumpet thus does summon us?

According to the faire-play of the world,
Let me have audience: I am sent to speak:
My holy Lord of Millane, from the King
I come to learn how you have dealt for him:
And, as you answer, I do know the scope
And warrant limited unto my tongue.

The Dolphin is too wilful opposite
And will not temporize with my entreaties:
He flatly says, hee^ll not lay down his Arms.

By all the blood that ever fury breathed,
The youth says well. Now hear our English King,
For thus his Royalty does speak in me:
He is prepared, and reason to he should,
This apish and unmannerly approach,
This harnessed Mask, and unadvised Revel,
This vn-heard sauciness and boyish Troops,
The King does smile at, and is well prepared
To whip this dwarfish war, this Pigmy Arms
From out the circle of his Territories.
That hand which had the strength, even at your door,
To cudgel you, and make you take the hatch,
To diue like Buckets in concealed Wells,
To crowch in litter of your stable plankes,
To lie like pawnes, locked up in chests and truncks,
To hug with swine, to seek sweet safety out
In vaults and prisons, and to thrill and shake,
Even at the crying of your Nations crow,
Thinking this voice an armed Englishman.
Shall that victorious hand be feebled here,
That in your Chambers gave you chasticement?
No: know the gallant Monarch is in Arms,
And like an Eagle, over his ayerie towers,
To sowsse annoyance that comes near his Nest;
And you degenerate, you ingrate Reuolts, you bloody Nero's, ripping up the
womb
Of your dear Mother-England: blush for shame:
For your own Ladies, and pale-visag'd Maids,
Like Amazons, come tripping after drums:
Their thimbles into armed Gantlets change,
Their Needl's to Lances, and their gentle hearts
To fierce and bloody inclination.

There end thy brave, and turn thy face in peace,
We grant thou can out-scold us: Far thee well,
We hold our time too precious to be spent
With such a brabler.

Give me leave to speak.


No, I will speak.


We will attend to neither:
Strike up the drums, and let the tongue of war
Plead for our interest, and our being here.

Indeed your drums being beaten, will cry out;
And so shall you, being beaten: Do but start
An echo with the clamor of thy drum,
And even at hand, a drum is ready braced,
That shall reuerberate all, as loud as thine.
Sound but a (...), and another shall
(As loud as thine) rattle the Welkins ear,
And mock the deep mouthed Thunder: for at hand
(Not trusting to this halting Legate here,
Whom he has used rather for sport, then need)
Is warlike John: and in his forehead sits
A bare-rib'd death, whose office is this day
To feast upon whole thousands of the French.

Strike up our drums, to find this danger out.


And thou shall find it (Dolphin) do not doubt


How goes the day with us? oh tell me Hubert.


Badly I fear; how fares your Majesty?


This Fever that has troubled me so long,
Lies heavy on me: oh, my heart is sick.

My Lord: your valiant kinsman Falconbridge,
Desires your Majesty to leave the field,
And send him word by me, which way you go.

Tell him toward Swinsted, to the Abbey there.


Be of good comfort: for the great supply,
That was expected by the Dolphin here,
Are wracked three nights ago on Goodwin sands.
This news was brought to Richard but even now,
The French fight coldly, and retire themselves.

Aye me, this tyrant Fever burns me up,
And will not let me welcome this good news.
Set on toward Swinsted: to my Litter straight,
Weakness possesses me, and I am faint.

I did not think the King so stored with friends.


Up once again: put spirit in the French,
If they miscarry: we miscarry too.

That misbegotten devil Falconbridge,
In spite of spite, alone vpholds the day.

They say King John sore sick, has left the field.


Lead me to the Reuolts of England here.


When we were happy, we had other names.


It is the Count Meloone.


Wounded to death.


Fly Noble English, you are bought and sold,
Vnthred the rude eye of Rebellion,
And welcome home again discarded faith,
Seek out King John, and fall before his feet:
For if the French be Lords of this loud day,
He means to recompense the pains you take,
By cutting off your heads: Thus has he sworn,
And I with him, and many more with me,
Upon the Altar at S. Edmondsbury,
Even on that Altar, where we swore to you
Dear Amity, and everlasting love.

May this be possible? May this be true?


Have I not hideous death within my view,
Retaining but a quantity of life,
Which bleeds away, even as a form of wax
Resolves from his figure against the fire?
What in the world should make me now deceive,
Since I must loose the use of all deceit?
Why should I then be false, since it is true
That I must dye here, and live hence, by Truth?
I say again, if Lewis do win the day,
He is forsworn, if ere those eyes of yours
Behold another day break in the East:
But even this night, whose black contagious breath
Already smoakes about the burning Crest
Of the old, feeble, and day-wearied Sun,
Even this ill night, your breathing shall expire,
Paying the fine of rated Treachery,
Even with a treacherous fine of all your lives:
If Lewis, by your assistance win the day.
Commend me to one Hubert, with your King;
The love of him, and this respect besides
(For that my Grandsite was an Englishman)
Awakes my Conscience to confess all this.
In lieu whereof, I pray you bear me hence
From forth the noise and rumor of the Field;
Where I may think the remnant of my thoughts
In peace: and part this body and my soul
With contemplation, and devout desires.

We do believe thee, and beshrew my soul,
But I do love the favor, and the form
Of this most fair occasion, by the which
We will vntread the steps of damned flight,
And like a bated and retired Flood,
Leaving our rankness and irregular course,
Stoop low within those bounds we have ore-look'd,
And calmely run on in obedience
Even to our Ocean, to our great King John.
My arm shall give thee help to bear thee hence,
For I do see the cruel pangs of death
Right in thine eye. Away, my friends, new flight,
And happy newness, that intends old right.

The Sun of heaven (me thought) was loath to set;
But staid, and made the Western Welkin blush,
When English measure backward their own ground
In faint Retire: Oh bravely came we off,
When with a volley of our needless shot,
After such bloody toil, we bid good night,
And woon'd our tottering colors clearly up,
Last in the field, and almost Lords of it.

Where is my Prince, the Dolphin?


Here: what news?


The Count Meloone is slain: The English Lords
By his persuasion, are again fallen off,
And your supply, which you have wished so long,
Are cast away, and sunk on Goodwin sands.

Ah foul, shrewd news. Beshrew thy very heart:
I did not think to be so sad to night
As this has made me. Who was he that said
King John did fly an hour or two before
The stumbling night did part our weary powers?

Who ever spoke it, it is true my Lord.


Well: keep good quarter, and good care to night,
The day shall not be up so soon as I,
To try the fair adventure of to morrow.

Whose there? Speak hoa, speak quickly, or I shoot.


A Friend. What art thou?


Of the part of England.


Whether do thou go?


What Is that to thee?
Why may not I demand of thine affairs,
As well as thou of mine?

Hubert, I think.


Thou have a perfect thought:
I will upon all hazards well believe
Thou art my friend, that know my tongue so well:
Who art thou?

Who thou will: and if thou please
Thou may be-friend me so much, as to think
I come one way of the Plantagenets.

Unkind remembrance: thou, and endless night,
Have done me shame: Brave Soldier, pardon me,
That any accent breaking from thy tongue,
Should escape the true acquaintance of mine ear.

Come, come: sans complement, What news abroad?


Why here walk I, in the black brow of night
To find you out.

Brcefe then: and what is the news?


O my sweet sir, news fitting to the night,
Black, fearful, comfortless, and horrible.

Show me the very wound of this ill news,
I am no woman, I Will not swound at it.

The King I fear is poisoned by a Monk,
I left him almost speechless, and broke out
To acquaint you with this evil, that you might
The better arm you to the sudden time,
Then if you had at leisure known of this.

How did he take it? Who did taste to him?


A Monk I tell you, a resolved villain
Whose Bowels suddenly burst out: The King
Yet speaks, and peradventure may recover.

Who did thou leave to tend his Majesty?


Why know you not? The Lords are all come back,
And brought Prince Henry in their company,
At whose request the king has pardoned them,
And they are all about his Majesty.

Withold thine indignation, mighty heaven,
And tempt us not to bear above our power:
I Will tell thee Hubert, half my power this night
Passing these Flats, are taken by the Tide,
These Lincolne-Washes have devoured them,
My self, well mounted, hardly have escaped.
Away before: Conduct me to the king,
I doubt he will be dead, or ere I come.

It is too late, the life of all his blood
Is touched, corruptibly: and his pure brain
(Which some suppose the souls frail dwelling house)
Does by the idle Comments that it makes,
Foretell the ending of mortality.

His Highness yet does speak, and holds belief,
That being brought into the open air,
It would allay the burning quality
Of that fell poison which assayleth him.

Let him be brought into the Orchard here:
Does he still rage?

He is more patient
Then when you left him; even now he sung.

Oh vanity of sickness: fierce extremes
In their continuance, will not feel themselves.
Death having praide upon the outward parts
Leaves them invisible, and his seige is now
Against the wind, the which he pricks and wounds
With many legions of strange fantasies,
Which in their throng, and press to that last hold,
Counfound themselves. It Is strange yt death should sing:
I am the Symer to this pale faint Swan,
Who chaunts a doleful hymn to his own death,
And from the organ-pipe of frailety sings
His soul and body to their lasting rest.

Be of good comfort (Prince) for you are borne
To set a form upon that indigest
Which he has left so shapelesse, and so rude.

I marry, now my soul has elbow room,
It would not out at windows, nor at doors,
There is so hot a summer in my bosom,
That all my bowels crumble up to dust:
I am a scribled form drawn with a pen
Upon a Parchment, and against this fire
Do I shrink up.

How fares your Majesty?


Poisoned, ill fare: dead, forsook, cast off,
And none of you will bid the winter come
To thrust his ycie fingers in my maw;
Nor let my kingdoms Rivers take their course
Through my burned bosom: nor entreat the North
To make his bleake winds kiss my parched lips,
And comfort me with cold. I do not ask you much,
I beg cold comfort: and you are so straight
And so ungrateful, you deny me that.

Oh that there were some virtue in my tears,
That might relieve you.

The salt in them is hot.
Within me is a hell, and there the poison
Is, as a fiend, confined to tyrannize,
On vnrepreeuable condemned blood.

Oh, I am scalded with my violent motion
And spleen of speed, to see your Majesty.

Oh Cozen, thou art come to set mine eye:
The tackle of my heart, is cracked and burnt,
And all the shrowds wherewith my life should sail,
Are turned to one thread, one little hair:
My heart has one poor string to stay it by,
Which holds but till thy news be uttered,
And then all this thou see, is but a clod,
And module of confounded royalty.

The Dolphin is preparing hither-ward,
Where heaven he knows how we shall answer him.
For in a night the best part of my power,
As I upon advantage did remove,
Were in the Washes all unwarily,
Devoured by the unexpected flood.

You breath these dead news in as dead an ear
My Liege, my Lord: but now a King, now thus.

Even so must I run on, and even so stop.
What surety of the world, what hope, what stay,
When this was now a King, and now is clay?

Art thou gone so? I do but stay behind,
To do the office for thee, of revenge,
And then my soul shall wait on thee to heaven,
As it on earth has been thy servant still.
Now, now you Stars, that move in your right spheres,
Where be your powers? Show now your mended faiths,
And instantly return with me again.
To push destruction, and perpetual shame
Out of the weak door of our fainting Land:
Straight let us seek, or straight we shall be sought,
The Dolphine rages at our very heels.

It seems you know not then so much as we,
The Cardinal Pandulph is within at rest,
Who half an hour since came from the Dolphin,
And brings from him such offers of our peace,
As we with honor and respect may take,
With purpose presently to leave this war.

He will the rather do it, when he sees
Our selves well sinew'd to our defense.

Nay, it is in a manner done already,
For many carriages he has dispatched
To the sea side, and put his cause and quarrel
To the disposing of the Cardinal,
With whom your self, my self, and other Lords,
If you think meet, this afternoon will poast
To consummate this business happily.

Let it be so, and you my noble Prince,
With other Princes that may best be spared,
Shall wait upon your Fathers Funeral.

At Worster must his body be interred,
For so he willed it.

Thither shall it then,
And happily may your sweet self put on
The lineall state, and glory of the Land,
To whom with all submission on my knee,
I do bequeath my faithful services
And true subjection everlastingly.

And the like tender of our love we make
To rest without a spot for evermore.

I have a kind soul, that would give thanks,
And knows not how to do it, but with tears.

Oh let us pay the time: but needful woe,
Since it has been before hand with our greefes.
This England never did, nor never shall
Lie at the proud foot of a Conqueror,
But when it first did help to wound it self.
Now, these her Princes are come home again,
Come the three corners of the world in Arms,
And we shall shocke them: Naught shall make us rue,
If England to it self, do rest but true.


