LEt Fame, that all hunt after in their lives,
Live registered upon our brazen Tombs,
And then grace us in the disgrace of death:
when spite of cormorant devouring Time,
The endeavor of this present breath may buy:
That honor which shall bate his sythes keen edge,
And make us heirs of all eternity:
Therefore brave Conquerours, for so you are,
That war against your own affections,
And the huge Army of the worlds desires.
Our late edict shall strongly stand in force,
Nauar shall be the wonder of the world.
Our Court shall be a little Achademe,
Still and contemplative in living Art.
You three, Berowne, Dumaine, and Longauill,
Have sworn for three years term, to live with me:
My fellow Scholars, and to keep those statutes
That are recorded in this scedule here.
Your oaths are past, and now subscribe your names:
That his own hand may strike his honor down,
That violates the smallest branch herein:
If you are armed to do, as sworn to do,
Subscribe to your deep oaths, and keep it to.

I am resolved, it is but a three years fast:
The mind shall banquet, though the body pine,
Fat paunches have lean pates: and dainty bits,
Make rich the ribs, but bankerout the wits.

My loving Lord, Dumane is mortified,
The grosser manner of these worlds delights,
He throws upon the gross worlds baser slaves:
To love, to wealth, to pomp, I pine and die,
With all these living in Philosophy.

I can but say their protestation over,
So much, dear Liege, I have already sworn,
That is, to live and study here three years.
But there are other strict obseruances:
As not to see a woman in that term,
Which I hope well is not enrolled there.
And one day in a week to touch no food:
And but one meal on every day beside:
The which I hope is not enrolled there.
And then to sleep but three hours in the night,
And not be seen to wink of all the day.
When I was wont to think no harm all night,
And make a dark night too of half the day:
Which I hope well is not enrolled there.
O, these are barren taskes, too hard to keep,
Not to see Ladies, study, fast, not sleep.

Your oath is past, to pass away from these.


Let me say no my Liege, and if you please,
I only swore to study with your grace,
And stay here in your Court for three years space.

You swore to that Berowne, and to the rest.


By yea and nay sir, than I swore in jest.
What is the end of study, let me know?

Why that to know which else we should not know.


Things hid and bard (you mean) from common sense.


I, that is studies god-like recompense.


Come on then, I will swear to study so,
To know the thing I am forbid to know:
As thus, to study where I well may dine,
When I to fast expressly am forbid.
Or study where to meet some Mistress fine,
When Mistresses from common sense are hid.
Or having sworn too hard a keeping oath,
Study to break it, and not break my troth.
If studies gain be thus, and this be so,
Study knows that which yet it does not know,
Swear me to this, and I will nere say no.

These be the stops that hinder study quite,
And train our intellects to vain delight.

Why? all delights are vain, and that most vain
Which with pain purchased, does inherit pain,
As painefully to poare upon a Book,
To seek the light of truth, while truth the while
Does falsely blind the eyesight of his look:
Light seeeking light, does light of light beguile:
So ere you find where light in darkness lies,
Your light grows dark by losing of your eyes.
Study me how to please the eye indeed,
By fixing it upon a fairer eye,
Who dazzling so, that eye shall be his heed,
And give him light that it was blinded by.
Study is like the heavens glorious Sun,
That will not be deep searched with saucy looks:
Small have continual plodders ever won,
Save base authority from others Books.
These earthly Godfathers of heavens lights,
That give a name to every fixed Star,
Have no more profit of their shining nights,
Then those that walk and wot not what they are.
Too much to know, is to know naught but fame*
And every Godfather can give a name.

How well he is read, to reason against reading.


Proceeded well, to stop all good proceeding.


He weeds the corn, and still lets grow the weeding.


The Spring is near when green geesse are a breeding.


How follows that?


Fit in his place and time.


In reason nothing.


Something then in rhyme.


Berowne is like an envious sneaping Frost,
That bites the first borne infants of the Spring.

Well, say I am, why should proud Summer boast,
Before the Birds have any cause to sing?
Why should I joy in any abortiue birth?
At Christmas I no more desire a Rose,
Then wish a Snow in Mayes new fangled shows:
But like of each thing that in season grows.
So you to study now it is too late,
That were to clymbe ore the house to unlock the gate.

Well, fit you out: go home Berowne: adue.


No my good Lord, I have sworn to stay with you.
And though I have for barbarism spoke more,
Then for that Angel knowledge you can say,
Yet confident I Will keep what I have sworn,
And bide the penance of each three years day.
Give me the paper, let me read the same,
And to the strictest decrees I Will write my name.

How well this yielding rescues thee from shame.


Item. That no woman shall come within a mile of my Court.
Has this bin proclaimed?

Four days ago.


Let Us see the penalty.
On pain of loosing her tongue.
Who devised this penalty?

Marry that did I.


Sweet Lord, and why?


To fright them hence with that dread penalty, A dangerous law against
gentilitie. Item, If any man be seen to talk with a woman within the term
of three years, he shall endure such public shame as the rest of the Court
shall possibly devise


This Article my Liege your self must break,
For well you know here comes is Embassy
The French Kings daughter, with your self to speak:
A Maid of grace and complete majesty,
About surrender up of Aquitaine:
To her decrepit, sick, and bedridden Father.
Therefore this Article is made in vain,
Or vainly comes the admired Princess hither.

What say you Lords?
Why, this was quite forgot.

So Study evermore is ouershot,
While it does study to have what it would,
It does forget to do the thing it should:
And when it has the thing it hunteth most,
It Is won as towns with fire, so won, so lost.

We must of force dispense with this Decree,
She must lie here on mere necessity.

Necessity will make us all forsworn
Three thousand times within this three years space:
For every man with his affects is borne,
Not by might mastred, but by special grace.
If I break faith, this word shall break for me,
I am forsworn on mere necessity.
So to the Laws at large I write my name,
And he that breaks them in the least degree,
Stands in attainder of eternal shame.
Suggestions are to others as to me:
But I believe although I seem so loath,
I am the last that will last keep his oath.
But is there no quick recreation granted?

I that there is, our Court you know is hanted
With a refined trauailer of Spain,
A man in all the worlds new fashion planted,
That has a mint of phrases in his brain:
One, who the music of his own vain tongue,
Does ravish like enchanting harmony:
A man of complements whom right and wrong
Have chose as vmpire of their mutiny.
This child of fancy that Armado hight,
For interim to our studies shall relate,
In high-borne words the worth of many a Knight:
From tawnie Spain lost in the worlds debate.
How you delight my Lords, I know not I,
But I protest I love to hear him lie,
And I will use him for my Minstrelsie.

Armado is a most illustrious wight,
A man of fire, new words, fashions own Knight.

Costard the swain and he, shall be our sport,
And so to study, three years is but short.

Which is the Dukes own person.


This fellow, What would?


I my self reprehend his own person, for I am his graces Tharborough: But I
would see his own person in flesh and blood


This is he.


Signeor Arm, Arm commends you:
There Is villainy abroad, this letter will tell you more.

Sir the Contempts thereof are as touching me.


A letter from the magnificent Armado.


How low soever the matter, I hope in God for high words.


A high hope for a low heaven, God grant us patience.


To hear, or forbear hearing.


To hear meekely sir, and to laugh moderately, or to forbear both.


Well sir, be it as the style shall give us cause to clime in the merrinesse.


The matter is to me sir, as concerning Iaquenetta.
The manner of it is, I was taken with the manner.

In what manner?


In manner and form following sir all those three. I was seen with her in the
Manor house, sitting with her upon the Form, and taken following her into the
Park: which put to gether, is in manner and form following. Now sir for the
manner; It is the manner of a man to speak to a woman, for the form in some
form


For the following sir.


As it shall follow in my correction, and God defend the right.


Will you hear this Letter with attention?


As we would hear an Oracle.


Such is the simplicity of man to harken after the flesh.


GReat Deputy, the Welk^ns Vicegerent, and sole dominator of Nauar, my souls
earths God, and bodies fostring patron


Not a word of Costard yet.


So it is.


It may be so: but if he say it is so, he is in telling true: but so.


Peace,


Be to me, and every man that dares not fight.


No words,


Of other men's secrets I beseech you.


So it is besieged with sable colored melancholy, I did commend the black
oppressing humor to the most wholesome Physic of thy health-giuing air: And
as I am a Gentleman, betook my self to walk: the time When? about the sixth
hour, When beasts most grase, birds best pecke, and men sit down to that
nourishment which is called supper: So much for the time When. Now for the
ground Which? which I mean I walked upon, it is ycliped, Thy Park. Then for
the place Where? where I mean I did encounter that obscene and most
preposterous event that draws from my snow-white pen the ebon colored Ink,
which here thou viewest, beholdest, suruayest, or see. But to the place
Where? It stands North North-east and by East from the West corner of thy
curious knotted garden; There did I see that low spirited Swain, that base
Minow of thy mirth, ( Clown. Me?) that vnletered small knowing soul, ( Clow
Me?) that shallow vassal ( Clow. Still me?) which as I remember, hight
Costard, ( Clow. O me) sorted and consorted contrary to thy established
proclaimed Edict and Continet, Cannon: Which with, o with, but with this I
passion to say wherewith


With a Wench.


With a child of our Grandmother E^e, a female; or for thy more sweet
understanding a woman: him, I (as my ever esteemed duty pricks me on) have
sent to thee, to receive the meed of punishment by thy sweet Graces Officer
Anthony Dull, a man of good repute, carriage, bearing, and estimation


Me, an't shall please you? I am Anthony Dull.


For Iaquenetta (so is the weaker vessel called) which I apprehended with the
aforesaid Swain, I keeper her as a vessel of thy Laws fury, and shall at
the least of thy sweet notice, bring her to trial. Thine in all complements of
devoted and heart-burning heat of duty

Don Adriana de Armado.


This is not so well as I looked for, but the best that ever I heard.


I the best, for the worst. But sir, What say you to this?


Sir I confess the Wench.


Did you hear the Proclamation?


I do confess much of the hearing it, but little of the marking of it.


It was proclaimed a years imprisonment to be taken with a Wench.


I was taken with none sir, I was taken with a Damsel.


Well, it was proclaimed Damsel.


This was no Damsel neither sir, she was a Virgin.


It is so varried to, for it was proclaimed Virgin.


If it were, I deny her Virginity: I was taken with a Maid.


This Maid will not serve your turn sir.


This Maid will serve my turn sir.


Sir I will pronounce your sentence: You shall fast a Week with Branne and
water


I had rather pray a Month with Mutton and Porridge.


And Don Armado shall be your keeper.
My Lord Berowne, see him delivered ore,
And go we Lords to put in practice that,
Which each to other has so strongly sworn.

I Will lay my head to any good man's hat,
These oaths and laws will prove an idle scorn.
Sir, come on.

I suffer for the truth sir: for true it is, I was taken with Iaquenetta, and
Iaquenetta is a true girl, and therefore welcome the sour cup of prosperity,
affliction may one day smile again, and until then sit down sorrow


Boy, What sign is it when a man of great spirit grows melancholy?


A great sign sir, that he will look sad.


Why? sadness is one and the selfsame thing dear impe.


No no, O Lord sir no.


How can thou part sadness and melancholy my tender Iuuenall?


By a familiar demonstration of the working, my tough signeur.


Why tough signeur? Why tough signeur?


Why tender Iuuenall? Why tender Iuuenall?


I spoke it tender Iuuenall, as a congruent apathaton, appertaining to thy
young days, which we may nominate tender


And I tough signeur, as an appertinent title to your old time, which we may
name tough


Pretty and apt.


How mean you sir, I pretty, and my saying apt? or I apt, and my saying
pretty


Thou pretty because little.


Little pretty, because little: wherefore apt?


And therefore apt, because quick.


Speak you this in my praise Master?


In thy condign praise.


I will praise an Eele with the same praise.


What? that an Eele is ingenuous.


That an Eele is quick.


I do say thou art quick in answers. Thou heat'st my blood.


I am answered sir.


I love not to be crossed.


He speaks the mere contrary, crosses love not him.


I have promised to study iij. years with the Duke.


You may do it in an hour sir.


Impossible.


How many is one thrice told?


I am ill at reckning, it fits the spirit of a Tapster.


You are a gentleman and a gamester fir.


I confess both, they are both the varnish of a complete man.


Then I am sure you know how much the gross sum of deus-ace amounts to.


It does amount to one more then two.


Which the base vulgar call three.


True.


Why sir is this such a piece of study? Now here is three studied, ere you will
thrice wink, and how easy it is to put years to the word three, and study
three years in two words, the dancing horse will tell you


A most fine Figure.


To prove you a Cipher.


I will hereupon confess I am in love: and as it is base for a Soldier to
love; so am I in love with a base wench. If drawing my sword against the humor
of affection, would deliver me from the reprobate thought of it, I would take
Desire prison, and ransom him to any French Courtier for a n^ devised curtsie.
I think scorn to sigh, me thinks I should out-sweare Cupid. Comfort me Boy,
What great men have been in love


Hercules Master.


Most sweet Hercules: more authority dear Boy, name more; and sweet my child
let them be men of good repute and carriage


Sampson Master, he was a man of good carriage, great carriage: for he carried
the Towne-gates on his back like a Porter: and he was in love


O well-knit Sampson, strong ioynted Sampson; I do excel thee in my rapier,
as much as thou did me in carrying gates. I am in love too. Who was Sampsons
love my dear Moth


A Woman, Master.


Of what complexion?


Of all the four, or the three, or the two, or one of the four.


Tell me precisely of what complexion?


Of the seawater Green sir.


Is that one of the four complexions?


As I have read sir, and the best of them too.


Green indeed is the color of Lovers: but to have a Love of that color,
methinkes Sampson had small reason for it. He surely affected her for her wit


It was so sir, for she had a green wit.


My Love is most immaculate white and red.


Most immaculate thoughts Master, are masked under such colors.


Define, define, well educated infant.


My fathers wit, and my mothers tongue assist me.


Sweet invocation of a child, most pretty and patheticall.


If she be made of white and red,
Her faults will nere be known:
For blush-in cheeks by faults are bred,
And fears by pale white shown:
Then if she fear, or be to blame,
By this you shall not know,
For still her cheeks possess the same,
Which native she does owe:
A dangerous rhyme master against the reason of white and read.

Is there not a ballet Boy, of the King and the Beggar?


The world was very guilty of such a Ballet some three ages since, but I think
now it is not to be found: or if it were, it would neither serve for the
writing, nor the tune


I will have that subject newly writ ore, that I may example my digression by
some mighty president. Boy, I do love that Country girl that I took in the
Park with the rational hind Costard: she deserves well


To be whipped: and yet a better love then my Master.


Sing Boy, my spirit grows heavy in jove.


And that is great marvel, loving a light wench.


I say sing.


Forbear till this company be past.


Sir, the Dukes pleasure, is that you keep Costard safe, and you must let him
take no delight, nor no penance, but he must fast three days a week: for
this Damsel, I must keep her at the Park, she is alowd for the Day-woman.
Fare you well


I do betray my self with blushing: Maid.


Man.


I will visit thee at the Lodge.


That Is here by.


I know where it is situate.


Lord how wise you are!


I will tell thee wonders.


With what face?


I love thee.


So I heard you say.


And so farewell.


Fair weather after you.


Come Iaquenetta, away.


Villain, thou shall fast for thy offenses ere thou be pardoned.


Well sir, I hope when I do it, I shall do it on a full stomach.


Thou shall be heavily punished.


I am more bound to you then your fellows, for they are but lightly rewarded.


Take away this villain, shut him up.


Come you transgressing slave, away.


Let me not be pent up sir, I will fast being loose.


No sir, that were fast and loose: thou shall to prison.


Well, if ever I do see the merry days of desolation that I have seen, some
shall see


What shall some see?


Nay nothing, Master Moth, but what they look upon. It is not for prisoners to
be silent in then words, and therefore I will say nothing: I thank God, I have
as little patience as another man, and therefore I can be quiet


I do affect the very ground (which is base) where her shoe (which is baser)
guided by her foot (which is basest) does tread. I shall be forsworn (which ia
a great argument of falsehood) if I love. And how can that be true love, which
is falsely attempted? Love is a familiar, Love is a Devil. There is no evil
Angel but Love, yet Sampson was so tempted, and he had an excellent strength:
Yet was Solomon so seduced, and he had a very good wit. Cupids But shaft is
too hard for Hercules Clubbe, and therefore too much ods for a Spaniards
Rapier: The first and second cause will not serve my turn: the Passado he
respects not, the Duello he regards not; his disgrace is to be called Boy, but
his glory is to subdue men. Adue Valor, rust Rapier, be still Drum, for your
manager is in love; yea he loves. Assist me some extemporall god of Rhyme, for
I am sure I shall turn Sonnet. Devise Wit, write Pen, for I am for whole
volumes in folio


Now Madam summon up your dearest spirits,
Consider who the King your father sends:
To whom he sends, and what is his Embassy.
Your self, held precious in the worlds esteem,
To parlee with the sole inheritour
Of all perfections that a man may owe,
Matchless Navarre, the plea of no less weight
Then Aquitaine, a Dowry for a Queen.
Be now as prodigal of all dear grace,
As Nature was in making Graces dear,
When she did starve the general world beside,
And prodigally gave them all to you.

Good L. Boyet, my beauty though but mean,
Needs not the painted flourish of your praise:
Beauty is bought by judgment of the eye,
Not vttred by base sale of chapmens tongues:
I am less proud to hear you tell my worth,
Then you much wiling to be counted wise,
In spending your wit in the praise of mine.
But now to task the tasker, good Boyet,

You are not ignorant all-telling fame
Does noise abroad Nauar has made a vow,
Till painful study shall out-weare three years,
No woman may approach his silent Court:
Therefore to's seems it a needful course,
Before we enter his forbidden gates,
To know his pleasure, and in that behalf
Bold of your worthiness, we single you,
As our best moving fair soliciter:
Tell him, the daughter of the King of France,
On serious business craving quick dispatch,
Importunes personal conference with his grace.
Haste, signify so much while we attend,
Like humble visag'd suitors his high will.

Proud of employment, willingly I go.


All pride is willing pride, and yours is so:
Who are the Votaries my loving Lords, that are vow-fellowes with this virtuous
Duke

Longauill is one.


Know you the man?


I know him Madame at a marriage feast,
Between L. Perigort and the beauteous heir
Of Jacques Fauconbridge solemnized.
In Normandy saw I this Longauill,
A man of sovereign parts he is esteemed:
Well fitted in Arts, glorious in Arms:
Nothing becomes him ill that he would well.
The only soil of his fair virtues gloss,
If virtues gloss will stain with any soil,
Is a sharp wit matched with too blunt a Will:
Whose edge has power to cut whose will still wills,
It should none spare that come within his power.

Some merry mocking Lord belike, is it so?


They say so most, that most his humors know.


Such short lived wits do wither as they grow.
Who are the rest?

The young Dumaine, a well accomplished youth,
Of all that Virtue love, for Virtue loved.
Most power to do most harm, least knowing ill:
For he has wit to make an ill shape good,
And shape to win grace though she had no wit.
I saw him at the Duke Alansoes once,
And much too little of that good I saw,
Is my report to his great worthiness.

Another of these Students at that time,
Was there with him, as I have heard a truth.
Berowne they call him, but a merrier man,
Within the limit of becoming mirth,
I never spent an hours talk withal.
His eye begets occasion for his wit,
For every object that the one does catch,
The other turns to a mirth-mouing jest.
Which his fair tongue (conceits expositor)
Delivers in such apt and gracious words,
That aged ears play treuant at his tales,
And younger hearings are quite ravished.
So sweet and voluble is his discourse.

God bless my Ladies, are they all in love?
That every one her own has garnished,
With such bedecking ornaments of praise.

Here comes Boyet.


Now, what admittance Lord?


Nauar had notice of your fair approach,
And he and his competitors in oath,
Were all addressed to meet you gentle Lady
Before I came: Marry thus much I have learnt,
He rather means to lodge you in the field,
Like one that comes here to besiege his Court,
Then seek a dispensation for his oath:
To let you enter his unpeopled house.
Here comes Nauar.

Fair Princess, welcome to the Court of Nauar.


Fair I give you back again, and welcome I have not yet: the roof of this
Court is too high to be yours, and welcome to the wide fields, too base to be
mine


You shall be welcome Madam to my Court.


I will be welcome then, Conduct me thither.


Hear me dear Lady, I have sworn an oath.


Our Lady help my Lord, he will be forsworn.


Not for the world fair Madam, by my will.


Why, will shall break it will, and nothing else.


Your Ladyship is ignorant what it is.


Were my Lord so, his ignorance were wise,
Where now his knowledge must prove ignorance.
I hear your grace has sworn out Houseekeeping:
It Is deadly sin to keep that oath my Lord,
And sin to break it:
But pardon me, I am too sudden bold,
To teach a Teacher ill beseems me.
Vouchsafe to read the purpose of my coming,
And suddenly resolve me in my suite.

Madam, I will, if suddenly I may.


You will the sooner that I were away,
For you will prove perjured if you make me stay.

Did not I dance with you in Brabant once?


Did not I dance with you in Brabant once?


I know you did.


How needless was it then to ask the question?


You must not be so quick.


It Is long of you yt spur me with such questions.


Your wit's too hot, it speeds too fast, 'twill tire.


Not till it leave the Rider in the mire.


What time a day?


The hour that fools should ask.


Now fair befall your mask.


Fair fall the face it couers.


And send you many lovers.


Amen, so you be none.


Nay then will I be gone.


Madame, your father here does intimate,
The payment of a hundred thousand Crowns,
Being but the one half, of an entire sum,
Disbursed by my father in his wars.
But say that he, or we, as neither have
Received that sum; yet there remains unpaid
A hundred thousand more: in surety of the which,
One part of Aquitaine is bound to us,
Although not valued to the moneys worth.
If then the King your father will restore
But that one half which is unsatisfied,
We will give up our right in Aquitaine,
And hold fair friendship with his Majesty:
But that it seems he little purposes,
For here he does demand to have repaie,
An hundred thousand Crowns, and not demands
One payment of a hundred thousand Crowns,
To have his title live in Aquitaine.
Which we much rather had depart withal,
And have the money by our father lent,
Then Aquitane, so guelded as it is.
Dear Princess, were not his requests so far
From reasons yielding, your fair self should make
A yielding against some reason in my breast,
And go well satisfied to France again.

You do the King my Father too much wrong,
And wrong the reputation of your name,
In so unseeming to confess receyt
Of that which has so faithfully been paid.

I do protest I never heard of it,
And if you prove it, I Will repay it back,
Or yield up Aquitaine.

We arrest your word:
Boyet, you can produce acquittances
For such a sum, from special Officers,
Of Charles his Father.

Satisfy me so.


So please your Grace, the packet is not come
Where that and other specialties are bound,
To morrow you shall have a sight of them.

It shall suffice me; at which enterview,
All liberal reason would I yield unto:
Mean time, receive such welcome at my hand,
As Honor, without breach of Honor may
Make tender of, to thy true worthiness.
You may not come fair Princess in my gates,
But here without you shall be so received,
As you shall deem your self lodged in my heart,
Though so denied farther harbor in my house:
Your own good thoughts excuse me, and farewell,
To morrow we shall visit you again.

Sweet health and fair desires consort your grace.


Thy own wish wish I thee, in every place.


Lady, I will commend you to my own heart.


Pray you do my commendations,
I would be glad to see it.

I would you heard it groan.


Is the soul sick?.


Sick at the heart.


Alack, let it blood.


Would that do it good?


My Physic says I.


Will you pricked with your eye.


No point, with my knife.


Now God save thy life.


And yours from long living.


I cannot stay thanksgiving.


Sir, I pray you a word: What Lady is that same?


The heir of Alanson, Rosalin her name.


A gallant Lady, Mounsier fare you well.


I beseech you a word: what is she in the white?


A woman sometimes, if you saw her in the light.


Perchance light in the light: I desire her name.


She has but one for her self,
To desire that were a shame.

Pray you sir, whose daughter?


Her Mothers, I have heard.


Gods blessing a your beard.


Good sir be not offended,
She is an heir of Faulconbridge.

Nay, my choler is ended:
She is a most sweet Lady.

Not unlike sir, that may be.


What Is her name in the cap.


Katherine by good hap.


Is she wedded, or no.


To her will sir, or so.


You are welcome sir, adieu.


Fare well to me sir, and welcome to you.


That last is Beroune, the merry mad-cap Lord.
Not a word with him, but a jest.

And every jest but a word.


It was well done of you to take him at his word.


I was as willing to grapple, as he was to board.


Two hot Sheep marie:
And wherefore not Ships?

No Sheep (sweet Lamb) unless we feed on your lips.


You Sheep and I pasture: shall that finish the jest?


So you grant pasture for me.


Not so gentle beast.
My lips are no Common, though several they be.

Belonging to whom?


To my fortunes and me.


Good wits will be iangling, but gentles agree.
This civil war of wits were much better used
On Nauar and his bookemen, for here it is abused.

If my observation (which very seldom lies
By the hearts still rhetoric, disclosed with eyes)
Deceive me not now, Nauar is infected.

With what?


With that which we Lovers entitle affected.


Your reason.


Why all his behauiours do make their retire,
To the court of his eye, peeping thorough desire.
His heart like an Agot with your print impressed,
Proud with his form, in his eye pride expressed.
His tongue all impatient to speak and not see,
Did stumble with haste in his eie-sight to be,
All senses to that sense did make their repair,
To feel only looking on fairest of fair:
Me thought all his senses were locked in his eye,
As Jewels in Crystal for some Prince to buy.
Who tendering their own worth from whence they were glast,
Did point out to buy them along as you past.
His faces own margent did coat such amazes,
That all eyes saw his eyes enchanted with gazes.
I Will give you Aquitaine, and all that is his,
And you give him for my sake, but one loving Kiss.

Come to our Pauillion, Boyet is disposde.


But to speak that in words, which his eye has disclosed.
I only have made a mouth of his eye,
By adding a tongue, which I know will not lie.

Thou art an old Loue-monger, and speak skilfully.


He is Cupids Grandfather, and learnes news of him.


Then was Venus like her mother, for her father is but grim.


Do you hear my mad wenches?


No.


What then, do you see?


I, our way to be gone.


You are too hard for me.


Warble child, make passionate my sense of hearing.


Concolinel.


Sweet Air, go tenderness of years: take this Key, give enlargement to the
swain, bring him festinatly hither: I must employ him in a letter to my Love


Will you win your love with a French braule?


How meanest thou, brauling in French?


No my complete master, but to Iigge off a tune at the tongues end, canarie to
it with the feet, humor it with turning up your eye: sigh a note and sing a
note, sometime through the throat: if you swallowed love with singing, love
sometime through: nose as if you snuft up love by smelling love with your hat
penthouse-like ore the shop of your eyes, with your arms crossed on your
thinbellie doublet, like a Rabbet on a spit, or your hands in your pocket, like
a man after the old painting, and keep not too long in one tune, but a snip
and away: these are complements, these are humors, these betraie nice wenches
that would be betrayed without these, and make them men of note: do you note
men that most are affected to these


How have thou purchased this experience?


By my pen of observation.


But O, but O.


The Hobbie-horse is forgot.


Cal'st thou my love Hobbi-horse.


No Master, the Hobbie-horse is but a Colt, and and your Love perhaps, a
Hacknie
But have you forgot your Love?

Almost I had.


Negligent student, learn her by heart.


By heart, and in heart Boy.


And out of heart Master: all those three I will prove.


What will thou prove?


A man, if I live (and this) by, in, and without, upon the instant: by heart
you love her, because your heart cannot come by her: in heart you love her,
because your heart is in love with her: and out of heart you love her, being
out of heart that you cannot enjoy her


I am all these three.


And three times as much more, and yet nothing at all.


Fetch hither the Swain, he must carry me a letter.


A message well simpathis'd, a Horse to be ambassador for an Ass.


Ha, ha, What say thou?


Marry sir, you must send the Ass upon the Horse for he is very slow gated:
but I go


The way is but short, away.


As swift as Lead sir.


Thy meaning pretty ingenious, is not Lead a metal heavy, dull, and slow?


Minnime honest Master, or rather Master no.


I say Lead is slow.


You are too swift sir to say so.
Is that Lead slow which is fired from a Gunne?

Sweet smoke of Rhetorike,
He reputes me a Cannon, and the Bullet that is he:
I shoot thee at the Swain.

Thump then, and I flee.


A most acute iuuenall, voluble and free of grace,
By thy favor sweet Welkin, I must sigh in thy face.
Most rude melancholy, Valor gives thee place.
My Herald is returned.

A wonder Master, here is a Costard broken in a shin.


Some enigma, some riddle, come, thy Lenuoy begin.


No egma, no riddle, no lenuoy, no salve, in thee male sir. Or sir, Plantan, a
plain Plantan: no lenuoy, no lenuoy, no Salve sir, but a Plantan


By virtue thou inforcest laughter, thy silly thought, my spleen, the heauing
of my lunges prouokes me to rediculous smyling: O pardon me my stars, does the
inconsiderate take salve for lenuoy, and the word lenuoy for a salve


Do the wise think them other, is not lenuoy a salve?


No Page, it is an epilogue or discourse to make plain,
Some obscure precedence that has to fore bin feign.
Now will I begin your morrall, and do you follow with my lenuoy.
The Fox, the Ape, and the Humble-Bee,
Were still at odds, being but three.

Until the Goose came out of door,
Staying the odds by adding four.

A good Lenuoy, ending in the Goose: would you desire more?


The Boy has sold him a bargain, a Goose, that is flat
Sir, your pennyworth is good, and your Goose be fat*
To sell a bargain well is as cunning as fast and loose:
Let me see a fat Lenuoy, I that is a fat Goose.

Come hither, come hither:
How did this argument begin?

By saying that a Costard was broken in a shin.
Then called you for the Lenuoy.

True, and I for a Plantan:
Thus came your argument in:
Then the Boys fat Lenuoy, the Goose that you bought,
And he ended the market.

But tell me: How was there a Costard broken in a shin?


I will tell you sencibly.


Thou have no feeling of it Moth,
I will speak that Lenuoy.
I Costard running out, that was safely within,
Fell over the threshold, and broke my shin.

We will talk no more of this matter.


Till there be more matter in the shin.


Sir Costard, I will infranchise thee.


O, marry me to one Francis, I smell some Lenuoy, some Goose in this.


By my sweet soul, I mean, setting thee at liberty. Enfreedoming thy
person: thou were emured, restrained, captiuated, bound


True, true, and now you will be my purgation, and let me loose.


I give thee thy liberty, set thee from durance, and in lieu thereof, impose
on thee nothing but this: Bear this significant to the country Maid
Iaquenetta: there is remuneration, for the best ward of mine honors is
rewarding my dependants. Moth, follow


Like the sequel I.
Signeur Costard adieu.

My sweet ounce of man's flesh, my in-conie Jew: Now will I look to his
remuneration. Remuneration, O, that is the Latin word for three-farthings:
Three-farthings remuneration, What Is the price of this yncle? i.d. no, I Will give
you a remuneration: Why? It carries it remuneration: Why? It is a fairer name
then a French-Crowne. I will never buy and sell out of this word


O my good knave Costard, exceedingly well met.


Pray you sir, How much Carnation Ribbon may a man buy for a remuneration?


What is a remuneration?


Marry sir, half penny farthing.


O, Why then three farthings worth of Silk.


I thank your worship, God be wy you.


O stay slave, I must employ thee:
As thou will win my favor, good my knave,
Do one thing for me that I shall entreat.

When would you have it done sir?


O this afternoon.


Well, I will do it sir: Fare you well.


O thou know not what it is.


I shall know sir, when I have done it.


Why villain thou must know first.


I will come to your worship to morrow morning.


It must be done this afternoon,
Hark slave, it is but this:
The Princess comes to hunt here in the Park,
And in her train there is a gentle Lady:
When tongues speak sweetly, then they name her name,
And Rosaline they call her, ask for her:
And to her white hand see thou do commend
This sealed up counsel. There Is thy guerdon: go.

Gardon, O sweet gardon, better then remuneration, a leuenpence-farthing
better: most sweet gardon. I will do it sir in print: gardon, remuneration


O, and I forsooth in love,
I that have been loves whip?
A very Beadle to a humerous sigh: A Critic,
Nay, a night-watch Constable.
A domineering pedant ore the Boy,
Then whom no mortal so magnificent.
This wimpled, whyning, purblinde waiward Boy,
This signior Iunios giant drawfe, don Cupid,
Regent of Loue-rimes, Lord of folded arms,
The anointed sovereign of sighs and groans:
Liege of all loyterers and male contents:
Dread Prince of Placcats, King of Codpeeces.
Sole Emperator and great general
Of trotting Parrators (O my little heart.)
And I to be a Corporal of his field,
And wear his colors like a Tumblers hoope.
What? I love, I sue, I seek a wife,
A woman that is like a Germane Cloak,
Still a repairing: ever out of frame,
And never going a right, being a Watch:
But being watched, that it may still go right.
Nay, to be periurde, which is worst of all:
And among three, to love the worst of all,
A whitly wanton, with a velvet brow.
With two pitch bals stuck in her face for eyes.
I, and by heaven, one that will do the deed,
Though Argus were her Eunuch and her guard.
And I to sigh for her, to watch for her,
To pray for her, go to: it is a plague
That Cupid will impose for my neglect,
Of his almighty dreadful little might.
Well, I will love, write, sigh, pray, shue, groan,
Some men must love my Lady, and some lone.

Was that the King that spurd his horse so hard,
Against the steep vprising of the hill?

I know not, but I think it was not he.


Who ere a was, a showed a mounting mind:
Well Lords, to day we shall have our dispatch,
On Saturday we will return to France.
Then Forrester my friend, Where is the Bush
That we must stand and play the murderer in?

Hereby upon the edge of yonder Coppice,
A Stand where you may make the fairest shoot.

I thank my beauty, I am fair that shoot,
And thereupon thou speak the fairest shoot.

Pardon me Madam, for I meant not so.


What, what? First praise me, and then again say no.
O short lived pride. Not fair? alack for woe.

Yes Madam fair.


Nay, never paint me now,
Where fair is not, praise cannot mend the brow.
Here (good my glass) take this for telling true:
Fair payment for foul words, is more then due.

Nothing but fair is that which you inherit.


See, see, my beauty will be saved by merit.
O heresy in fair, fit for these days,
A giving hand, though foul, shall have fair praise.
But come, the Bow: Now Mercy goes to kill,
And shooting well, is then accounted ill:
Thus will I save my credit in the shoot,
Not wounding, pity would not let me do it:
If wounding, then it was to show my skill,
That more for praise, then purpose meant to kill.
And out of question, so it is sometimes:
Glory grows guilty of detested crimes,
When for Fames sake, for praise an outward part,
We bend to that, the working of the heart.
As I for praise alone now seek to spill
The poor Deeres blood, that my heart means no ill.

Do not cursed wives hold that selfe-soueraigntie
Only for praise sake, when they strive to be
Lords ore their Lords?

Only for praise and praise we may afford,
To any Lady that subdewes a Lord.

Here comes a member of the commonwealth.


God dig-you-den all, pray you which is the head Lady?


Thou shall know her fellow, by the rest that have no heads.


Which is the greatest Lady, the highest?


The thickest, and the tallest.


The thickest, and the tallest: it is so, truth is truth.
And your waste Mistress, were as slender as my wit,
One a these Maids girdles for your waste should be fit.
Are not you the chief woman? You are the thickest here?

What Is your will sir? What Is your will?


I have a Letter from Monsier Berowne,
To one Lady Rosaline.

O thy letter, thy letter: He Is a good friend of mine.
Stand a side good bearer.
Boyet, you can carue,
Break up this Capon.

I am bound to serve.
This Letter is mistook: it imports none here:
It is writ to Iaquenetta.

We will read it, I swear.
Break the neck of the Wax, and every one give ear.

BY heaven, that thou art fair, is most infallible: true that thou art
beauteous, truth it self that thou art lovely: more fairer then fair,
beautiful then beauteous, truer then truth it self: have comiseration on thy
heroical Vassal. The magnanimous and most illustrate King Cophetua set eye
upon the pernicious and indubitate Beggar Zenelophon: and he it was that might
rightly say, Veni, vidi, vici: Which to annothanize in the vulgar, O base and
obscure vulgar; videliset, He came, See, and overcame: he came one; see, two;
couercame three: Who came? the King. Why did he come? to see. Why did he see?
to overcome. To whom came he? to the Beggar. What saw he? the Beggar. Who
overcame he? the Beggar. The conclusion is victory: On whose side? the King:
the captive is inricht: On whose side? the Beggars. The catastrophe is a
Nuptial: on whose side? the Kings: no, on both in one, or one in both. I am
the King (for so stands the comparison) thou the Beggar, for so witnesses thy
lowliness. Shall I command thy love? I may. Shall I enforce thy love? I could.
Shall I entreat thy love? I will. What, shall thou exchange for rags,
roabes: for tittles titles, for thy self me. Thus expecting thy reply, I
profane my lips on thy foot, my eyes on thy picture, and my heart on thy
every part

Thine in the dearest design of industry, Don Adriana de Armatho.

Thus do thou hear the Nemean Lion roar,
Against thee thou Lamb, that stand as his pray:
Submissiue fall his princely feet before,
And he from forage will incline to play.
But if thou strive (poor soul) what art thou then?
Food for his rage, repasture for his den.

What plume of feathers is he that indicted this Letter? What vein? What
Wethercocke? Did you ever hear better


I am much deceived, but I remember the style.


Else your memory is bad, going ore it erewhile.


This Armando is a Spaniard that keeps here in court
A Phantasime, a Monarcho, and one that makes sport
To the Prince and his Booke-mates.

Thou fellow, a word.
Who gave thee this Letter?

I told you, my Lord.


To whom should thou give it?


From my Lord to my Lady.


From which Lord, to which Lady?


From my Lord Berowne, a good master of mine,
To a Lady of France, that he called Rosaline.

Thou have mistaken his letter. Come Lords away.
Here sweet, put up this, 'twill be thine another day.

Who is the shooter? Who is the shooter?


Shall I teach you to know.


I my continent of beauty.


Why she that bears the Bow. Finely put off.


My Lady goes to kill horns, but if thou marry,
Hang me by the neck, if horns that year miscarrie.
Finely put on.

Well then, I am the shooter.


And who is your Dear?


If we choose by the horns, your self come not near. Finely put on indeed.


You still wrangle with her Boyet, and she strikes at the brow.


But she her self is hit lower:
Have I hit her now.

Shall I come upon thee with an old saying, that was a man when King Pippin of
France was a little boy, as touching the hit it


So I may answer thee with one as old that was a woman when Queen Guinouer of
Britain was a little wench, as touching the hit it


Thou can not hit it, hit it, hit it,
Thou can not hit it my good man.

I cannot, cannot, cannot:
And I cannot, another can.

By my troth most pleasant, how both did fit it.


A mark marvelous well shot, for they both did hit.


A mark, O mark but that mark: a mark says my Lady.
Let the mark have a prick in it, to meat at, if it may be.

Wide a' th bow hand. in faith your hand is out.


Indeed a' must shoot nearer, or heel never hit the clout.


And if my hand be out, then belike your hand is in.


Then will she get the vpshoot by cleaving the is in.


Come, come, you talk greasely, your lips grow foul,


She Is too hard for you at pricks, sir challenge her to boule.


I fear too much rubbing: good night my good Oule.


By my soul a Swain, a most simple Clown.
Lord, Lord, how the Ladies and I have put him down.
O my troth most sweet jests, most inconie vulgar wit,
When it comes so smoothly off, so obscenely, as it were, so fit.
Armathor ath to the side, O a most dainty man.
To see him walk before a Lady, and to bear her Fan.
To see him kiss his hand, and how most sweetly a will swear:
And his Page at other side, that handful of wit,
Ah heavens, it is most patheticall nit.
Sowla, sowla.

Very reverent sport truly, and done in the testimony of a good conscience.


The Dear was (as you know) sanguis in blood, ripe as a Pomwater, who now
hangs like a Jewel in the ear of Celo the sky; the welken the heaven, and
anon falls like a Crab on the face of Terra, the soil, the land, the earth


Truly M. Holofernes, the epythithes are sweetly varied like a scholar at the
least: but sir I assure ye, it was a Bucke of the first head


Sir Nathaniel, haud credo.


'Twas not a haud credo, 'twas a Pricket.


Most barbarous intimation: yet a kind of insinuation, as it were in via, in
way of explication facere: as it were replication, or rather ostentare, to show
as it were his inclination after his undressed, unpolished, vneducated,
vnpruned, untrained, or rather unlettered, or ratherest vnconfirmed fashion, to
insert again my haud credo for a Dear


I said the Dear was not a haud credo, 'twas a Pricket.


Twice sod simplicity, his coctus, O thou monster Ignorance, how deformed
do thou look


Sir he has never fed of the dainties that are bred in a book.
He has not eat paper as it were:
He has not drunk ink.
His intellect is not replenished, he is only an animal, only sensible in
the duller parts: and such barren plants are set before us, that we thankful
should be: which we taste and feeling, are for those parts that do fructify
in us more then he

For as it would ill become me to be vain, indiscreet, or a fool;
So were there a patch set on Learning, to see him in a School.
But omne been say I, being of an old Fathers mind,
Many can brook the weather, that love not the wind.

You two are book-men: Can you tell by your wit, What was a month old at Cains
birth, that is not five weeks old as yet


Dictisima goodman Dull, dictisima goodman Dull.


What is dictima?


A title to Phebe, to Luna, to the Moon.


The Moon was a month old when Adam was no more.
And wrought not to fiue-weekes when he came to fiuescore.
The allusion holds in the Exchange.

It Is true indeed, the Collusion holds in the Exchange.


God comfort thy capacity, I say the allusion holds in the Exchange.


And I say the polusion holds in the Exchange: for the Moon is never but a
month old: and I say beside that, 'twas a Pricket that the Princess killed


Sir Nathaniel, will you hear an extemporall Epytaph on the death of the
Dear, and to humor the ignorant called the Dear, the Princess killed a
Pricket


Perge, good M. Holofernes, perge, so it shall please you to abrogate
scurilitie


I will something affect the letter, for it argues facility.
The prayfull Princess pearst and pricked a pretty pleasing Pricket,
Some say a Sore, but not a sore, till now made sore with shooting.
The Dogs did yell, put ell to Sore, then Sorell iumps from thicket:
Or Pricket-sore, or else Sorell, the people fall a hooting.
If Sore be sore, then ell to Sore, makes fifty sores O sorell:
Of one sore I an hundred make by adding but one more L.

A rare talent.


If a talent be a claw, look how he claws him with a talent.


This is a gift that I have simple: simple, a foolish extrauagant spirit, full
of forms, figures, shapes, objects, Ideas, apprehensions, motions,
reuolutions. These are begot in the ventricle of memory, nourisht in the womb
of primater, and delivered upon the mellowing of occasion: but the gift is good
in those in whom it is acute, and I am thankful for it


Sir, I praise the Lord for you, and so may my parishioners, for their Sons
are well tutored by you, and their Daughters profit very greatly under you: you
are a good member of the commonwealth


Mehercle, If their Sons be ingennous, they shall want no instruction: If
their Daughters be capable, I will put it to them. But Vir sapis qui pauca
loquitur, a soul Feminine saluteth us


God give you good morrow M. Person.


Master Person, quasi Person? And if one should be perst, Which is the one?


Marry M. Schoolmaster, he that is likest to a hogshead.


Of persing a Hogshead, a good luster of conceit in a curph of Earth, Fire
enough for a Flint, Pearl enough for a Swine: it is pretty, it is well


Good Master Parson be so good as read me this Letter, it was given me by
Costard, and sent me from Don Armatho: I beseech you read it


Facile procor gellida, quando pecas omnia sub vmbraruminat, and so forth. Ah
good old Mantuan, I may speak of thee as the traueiler does of Venice,
vemchie, vencha, que non te vnde, que non te perreche. Old Mantuam, old
Mantuan. Who understands thee not, vt re sol la mi fa: Under pardon sir, What
are the contents? or rather as Horrace says in his, What my soul verses


I sir, and very learned.


Let me hear a staff, a stanze, a verse, Lege domine.
If Love make me forsworn, how shall I swear to love?
Ah never faith could hold, if not to beauty vowed.
Though to my self forsworn, to thee I Will faithful prove.
Those thoughts to me were Oaks, to thee like Osiers bowed.
Study his byas leaves, and makes his book thine eyes.
Where all those pleasures live, that Art would comprehend.
If knowledge be the mark, to know thee shall suffice.
Well learned is that tongue, that well can thee commend.
All ignorant that soul, that sees thee without wonder.
Which is to me some praise, that I thy parts admire;
Thy eye Jove's lightning bears, thy voice his dreadful thunder.
Which not to anger bent, is music, and sweet fire.
Celestial as thou art, Oh pardon love this wrong,
That sings heavens praise, with such an earthly tongue.

You find not the apostraphas, and so miss the accent. Let me superuise the
cangenet


Here are only numbers ratified, but for the elegancy, facility, and golden
cadence of poesy caret: Ouiddius Naso was the man. And why in deed Naso, but
for smelling out the odoriferous flowers of fancy? the ierkes of invention
imitarie is nothing: So does the Hound his master, the Ape his keeper, the
tired Horse his rider: But Damosella virgin, Was this directed to you


I sir from one mounsier Berowne, one of the strange Queens Lords.


I will ouerglance the superscript.

To the snow-white hand of the most beauteous Lady Rosaline. I will look
again on the intellect of the Letter, for the nomination of the party written
to the person written unto

Your Ladyships in all desired employment, Berowne.
Sir Holofernes, this Berowne is one of the Votaries with the King, and here he
has framed a Letter to a sequent of the stranger Queens: which accidentally,
or by the way of progression, has miscarried. Trip and go my sweet, deliver
this Paper into the hand of the King, it may concern much: stay not thy
complement, I forgive thy duty, adue


Good Costard go with me:
Sir God save your life.

Have with thee my girl.


Sir you have done this in the fear of God very religiously: and as a certain
Father sait


Sir tell not me of the Father, I do fear colorable colors. But to return
to the Verses, Did they please you sir Nathaniel


Marvelous well for the pen.


I do dine to day at the fathers of a certain Pupil of mine, where if (being
repast) it shall please you to gratify the table with a Grace, I will on my
privilege I have with the parents of the foresaid Child or Pupil, undertake
your bien vonuto, where I will prove those Verses to be very unlearned, neither
sauouring of Poetry, Wit, nor Invention. I beseech your Society


And thank you to: for society (says the text) is the happiness of life.


And certes the text most infallibly concludes it.
Sir I do inuit you too, you shall not say me nay: pauca verba.
Away, the gentles are at their game, and we will to our recreation.

The King he is hunting the Dear,
I am coursing my self.
They have pitched a Toil, I am toyling in a pytch, pitch that defiles; defile,
a foul word: Well, set thee down sorrow; for so they say the fool said, and
so say I, and I the fool: Well proved wit. By the Lord this Love is as mad as
Ajax, it kills sheep, it kills me, I a sheep: Well proved again a my side. I
will not love; if I do hang me: in faith I will not. O but her eye: by this
light, but for her eye, I would not love her; yes, for her two eyes. Well, I
do nothing in the world but lie, and lie in my throat. By heaven I do love,
and it has taught me to Rhyme, and to be mallicholie: and here is part of my
Rhyme, and here my mallicholie. Well, she has one a' my Sonnets already, the
Clown bore it, the Fool sent it, and the Lady has it: sweet Clown, sweeter
Fool, sweetest Lady. By the world, I would not care a pin, if the other three
were in. Here comes one with a paper, God give him grace to groan


Ay me!


Shot by heaven: proceed sweet Cupid, thou have thumpt him with thy Birdbolt
under the left pap: in faith secrets


So sweet a kiss the golden Sun gives not,
To those fresh morning drops upon the Rose,
As thy eye beams, when their fresh raise have smot.
The night of dew that on my cheeks down flows.
Nor shines the silver Moon one half so bright,
Through the transparent bosom of the deep,
As does thy face through tears of mine give light:
Thou shin'st in every tear that I do weep,
No drop, but as a Coach does carry thee:
So ridest thou triumphing in my woe.
Do but behold the tears that swell in me,
And they thy glory through my grief will show:
But do not love thy self, then thou will keep
My tears for glasses, and still make me weep.
O Queen of Queens, how far do thou excel,
No thought can think, nor tongue of mortal tell.
How shall she know my griefs? I Will drop the paper.
Sweet leaves shade folly. Who is he comes here?
What Longauill, and reading: listen ear.

Now in thy likeness, one more fool appear.


Ay me, I am forsworn.


Why he comes in like a periure, wearing papers.


In love I hope, sweet fellowship in shame.


One drunkard loves another of the name.


Am I the first yt have been perjured so?


I could put thee in comfort, not by two that I know,
Thou make the triumphery, the corner cap of society,
The shape of Loves Tiburne, that hangs up simplicity.

I fear these stubborn lines lack power to move.
O sweet Maria, Empress of my Love,
These numbers will I tear, and write in prose.

O Rimes are gards on wanton Cupids hose,
Disfigure not his Shop.

This same shall go.

Did not the heavenly Rhetoric of thine eye,
Against whom the world cannot hold argument,
Persuade my heart to this false perjury?
Vows for thee broke deserve not punishment.
A woman I forswore, but I will prove,
Thou being a Goddess, I forswore not thee.
My Vow was earthly, thou a heavenly Love.
Thy grace being gained, cures all disgrace in me.
Vows are but breath; and breath a vapor is.
Then thou fair Sun, which on my earth do shine,
Exhalest this vapor-vow, in thee it is:
If broken then, it is no fault of mine:
If by me broke, What fool is not so wise,
To loose an oath, to win a Paradise?

This is the liver vein, which makes flesh a deity.
A green Goose, a Coddesse, pure pure Idolatry.
God amend us, God amend, we are much out of the way.

By whom shall I send this (company?) Stay.


All hid, all hid, an old infant play,
Like a demie God, here sit I in the sky,
And wretched fools secrets heedfully ore-eye.
More Sacks to the myll. O heavens I have my wish,
Dumaine transformed, four Woodcocks in a dish.

O most divine Kate.


O most profane coxcombe.


By heaven the wonder of a mortal eye.


By earth she is not, corporal, there you lie.


Her Amber hairs for foul has amber coted.


An Amber colored Raven was well noted.


As upright as the Cedar.


Stoop I say her shoulder is with-child.


As fair as day.


I as some days, but then no sun must shine.


O that I had my wish?


And I had mine.


And mine too good Lord.


Amen, so I had mine: Is not that a good word?


I would forget her, but a Fever she
Reigns in my blood, and will remembered be.

A Fever in your blood, why then incision
Would let her out in Sawcers, sweet misprision.

Once more I Will read the Ode that I have writ.


Once more I Will mark how Love can varry Wit.


On a day, alack the day:
Love, whose Month is every May,
Spied a blossom passing fair,
Playing in the wanton air:
Through the Velvet, leaves the wind,
All unseen, can passage find.
That the Lover sick to death,
Wish himself the heavens breath.
Air (quoth he) thy cheeks may blow,
Air, would I might triumph so.
But alack my hand is sworn,
Nere to pluck thee from thy throne:
Vow alack for youth unmeet,
Youth so apt to pluck a sweet.
Do not call it sin in me,
That I am forsworn for thee.
Thou for whom love would swear,
Juno but an Aethiop were,
And deny himself for Jove.
Turning mortal for thy Love.
This will I send, and something else more plain.
That shall express my true-loues fasting pain.
O would the King, Berowne and Longauill,
Were Lovers too, ill to example ill,
Would from my forehead wipe a perjured note:
For none offend, where all alike do dote.

Dumaine, thy Love is far from charity,
That in Loves grief desir'st society:
You may look pale, but I should blush I know,
To be ore-heard, and taken napping so.

Come sir, you blush: as his, your case is such,
You chide at him, offending twice as much.
You do not love Maria? Longauile,
Did never Sonnet for her sake compile;
Nor never lay his wreathed arms athwart
His loving bosom, to keep down his heart.
I have been closely shrouded in this bush,
And marked you both, and for you both did blush.
I heard your guilty Rimes, observed your fashion:
Saw sighs reeke from you, noted well your passion.
Aye me, says one! O Jove, the other cries!
On her hairs were Gold, Crystal the others eyes.
You would for Paradise break Faith and troth,
And Jove for your Love would infringe an oath.
What will Berowne say when that he shall hear
Faith infringed, which such zeal did swear.
How will he scorn? how will he spend his wit?
How will he triumph, leap, and laugh at it?
For all the wealth that ever I did see,
I would not have him know so much by me.

Now step I forth to whip hypocrisy.
Ah good my Liege, I pray thee pardon me.
Good heart, What grace have thou thus to reprove
These worms for loving, that art most in love?
Your eyes do make no couches in your tears.
There is no certain Princess that appears.
You Will not be perjured, it is a hateful thing:
Tush, none but Minstrels like of Sonnetting.
But are you not ashamed? nay, are you not
All three of you, to be thus much ore'shot?
You found his Moth, the King your Moth did see:
But I a Beam do find in each of three.
O what a Scene of fool'ry have I seen.
Of sighs, of groans, of sorrow, and of teene:
O me, with what strict patience have I sat,
To see a King transformed to a Gnat?
To see great Hercules whipping a Gigge,
And profound Solomon tuning a Iygge?
And Nestor play at push-pin with the boys,
And Critticke Tymon laugh at idle toys.
Where lies thy grief? O tell me good Dumaine;
And gentle Longauill, where lies thy pain?
And where my Liedges? all about the breast:
A Candle hoa!

Too bitter is thy jest.
Are we betrayed thus to thy ouer-view?

Not you by me, but I betrayed to you.
I that am honest, I that hold it sin
To break the vow I am engaged in.
I am betrayed by keeping company
With men, like men of inconstancy.
When shall you see me write a thing in rhyme?
Or groan for Ioane? or spend a minutes time,
In pruning me, when shall you hear that I will praise a hand, a foot, a
face, an eye: a gate, a state, a brow, a breast, a waste, a leg, a limme


Soft, Whither a-way so fast?
A true man, or a thief, that gallops so.

I post from Love, good Lover let me go.


God bless the King.


What Present have thou there?


Some certain treason.


What makes treason here?


Nay it makes nothing sir.


If it mar nothing neither,
The treason and you go in peace away together.

I beseech your Grace let this Letter be read,
Our person mis-doubts it: it was treason he said.

Berowne, read it over.


Where had thou it?


Of Costard.


Where had thou it?


Of Dun Adramadio, Dun Adramadio.


How now, what is in you? why do thou tear it?


A toy my Liege, a toy: your grace needs not fear it.


It did move him to passion, and therefore let us hear it.


It is Berowns writing, and here is his name.


Ah you whoreson loggerhead, you were borne to do me shame.
Guilty my Lord, guilty: I confess, I confess.

What?


That you three fools, lackt me fool, to make up the mess.
He, he, and you: and you my Liege, and I,
Are picke-purses in Love, and we deserve to die.
O dismiss this audience, and I shall tell you more.

Now the number is even.


True true, we are four: will these Turtles be gone?


Hence sirs, away.


Walk aside the true folk, and let the traitors stay.


Sweet Lords, sweet Lovers, O let us embrace,
As true we are as flesh and blood can be,
The Sea will ebb and flow, heaven will show his face:
Young blood does not obey an old decree.
We cannot cross the cause why we are borne:
Therefore of all hands must we be forsworn.

What, did these rent lines show some love of thine?


Did they, quoth you? Who sees the heavenly Rosaline,
That (like a rude and savage man of Inde.)
At the first opening of the gorgeous East,
Bows not his vassal head, and strooken blind,
Kisses the base ground with obedient breast?
What peremptory Eagle-sighted eye
Dares look upon the heaven of her brow,
That is not blinded by her majesty?

What zeal, what fury, has inspired thee now?
My Love (her Mistres) is a gracious Moon,
She (an attending Star) scarce seen a light.

My eyes are then no eyes, nor I Berowne.
O, but for my Love, day would turn to night,
Of all complexions the cul'd sovereignty,
Do meet as at a fair in her fair cheek,
Where several Worthies make one dignity,
Where nothing wants, that want it self does seek.
Lend me the flourish of all gentle tongues,
Fie painted Rethoricke, O she needs it not,
To things of sale, a sellers praise belongs:
She passes praise, then praise too short does blot.
A withered Hermit, fiuescore winters worn,
Might shake off fifty, looking in her eye:
Beauty does varnish Age, as if newborn,
And gives the Crutch the Cradles infancy.
O it is the Sun that makes all things shine.

By heaven, thy Love is black as Ebonie.


Is Ebonie like her? O word divine?
A wife of such wood were felicity.
O who can give an oath? Where is a book?
That I may swear Beauty does beauty lack,
If that she learn not of her eye to look:
No face is fair that is not full so black.

O paradoxe, Black is the badge of hell,
The hue of dungeons, and the School of night:
And beauties crest becomes the heavens well.

Devils soonest tempt resembling spirits of light.
O if in black my Ladies brows be decked,
It mournes, that painting usurping hair
Should ravish doters with a false aspect:
And therefore is she borne to make black, fair.
Her favor turns the fashion of the days,
For native blood is counted painting now:
And therefore red that would avoid dispraise,
Paints it self black, to imitate her brow.

To look like her are Chimny-sweepers black.


And since her time, are Colliers counted bright.


And Aethiops of their sweet complexion crake.


Dark needs no Candles now, for dark is light.


Your mistresses dare never come in rain,
For fear their colors should be washed away.

'Twere good yours did: for sir to tell you plain,
I Will find a fairer face not washed to day.

I Will prove her fair, or talk till doomsday here.


No Devil will fright thee then so much as she.


I never knew man hold vile stuff so dear.


Look, here is thy love, my foot and her face see.


O if the streets were paued with thine eyes,
Her feet were much too dainty for such tread.

O vile, then as she goes what upward lies?
The street should see as she walked over head.

But what of this, are we not all in love?


O nothing so sure, and thereby all forsworn.


Then leave this chat, and good Berown now prove
Our loving lawful, and our faith not torn.

I marie there, some flattery for this evil.


O some authority how to proceed,
Some tricks, some quillets, how to cheat the devil.

Some salve for perjury.


O it is more then need.
Have at you then affections men at arms,
Consider what you first did swear unto:
To fast, to study, and to see no woman:
Flat treason against the Kingly state of youth.
Say, Can you fast? your stomachs are too young:
And abstinence ingenders maladies.
And where that you have vowed to study (Lords)
In that each of you have forsworn his Book
Can you still dream and pore, and thereon look.
For when would you my Lord, or you, or you,
Have found the ground of studies excellence,
Without the beauty of a woman's face;
From women's eyes this doctrine I derive,
They are the Ground, the Books, the Achadems,
From whence does spring the true Promethean fire.
Why, universal plodding poisons up
The nimble spirits in the arteries,
As motion and long during action tyres
The sinnowy vigor of the trauailer.
Now for not looking on a woman's face,
You have in that forsworn the use of eyes:
And study too, the causer of your vow.
For where is any Author in the world,
Teaches such beauty as a woman's eye:
Learning is but an adiunct to our self,
And where we are, our Learning likewise is.
Then when our selves we see in Ladies eyes,
With our selves.
Do we not likewise see our learning there?
O we have made a Vow to study, Lords,
And in that vow we have forsworn our Books:
For when would you (my Leege) or you, or you?
In leaden contemplation have found out
Such fiery Numbers as the prompting eyes,
Of beauties tutors have enriched you with:
Other slow Arts entirely keep the brain:
And therefore finding barraine practizers,
Scarce show a harvest of their heavy toil.
But Love first learned in a Ladies eyes,
Lives not alone emured in the brain:
But with the motion of all elements,
Courses as swift as thought in every power,
And gives to every power a double power,
Above their functions and their offices.
It adds a precious seeing to the eye:
A Lovers eyes will gaze an Eagle blind.
A Lovers ear will hear the lowest sound.
When the suspicious head of theft is stopped.
Loves feeling is more soft and sensible,
Then are the tender horns of Cockled Snayles.
Loves tongue proves dainty, Bachus gross in taste,
For Valor, is not Love a Hercules?
Still climing trees in the Hesporides.
Subtle as Sphinx, as sweet and musical,
As bright Apollo's Lute, strung with his hair.
And when Love speaks, the voice of all the Gods,
Make heaven drowsy with the harmony.
Never durst Poet touch a pen to write,
Until his Ink were tempred with Loves sighs:
O then his lines would ravish savage ears,
And plant in Tyrants mild humility.
From women's eyes this doctrine I derive.
They sparcle still the right promethean fire,
They are the Books, the Arts, the Achademes,
That show, contain, and nourish all the world.
Else none at all in ought proves excellent.
Then fools you were these women to forswear:
Or keeping what is sworn, you will prove fools,
For Wisdoms sake, a word that all men love:
Or for Loves sake, a word that loves all men.
Or for Men's sake, the author of these Women:
Or Women's sake, by whom we men are Men.
Let Us once loose our oaths to find our selves,
Or else we loose our selves, to keep our oaths*
It is religion to be thus forsworn.
For Charity it self fulfills the Law:
And who can sever love from Charity.

Saint Cupid then, and Soldiers to the field.


Advance your standards, and upon them Lords.
Pell, mell, down with them: but be first advised,
In conflict that you get the Sun of them.

Now to plain dealing, Lay these glozes by,
Shall we resolve to woe these girls of France?

And win them too, therefore let us devise,
Some entertainment for them in their Tents.

First from the Park let us conduct them thither,
Then homeward every man attach the hand
Of his fair Mistress, in the afternoon
We will with some strange pastime solace them:
Such as the shortness of the time can shape,
For Revels, Dances, Maskes, and merry hours,
Fore-runne fair Love, strewing her way with flowers.

Away, away, no time shall be omitted,
That will be time, and may by us be fitted.

Alone, alone sowed Cockell, reaped no Corn,
And Justice always whirles in equal measure:
Light Wenches may prove plagues to men forsworn,
If so, our Copper buys no better treasure.

Satis quid sufficit.


I praise God for you sir, your reasons at dinner have been sharp and
sententious: pleasant without scurrillity, witty without affection, audacious
without impudency, learned without opinion, and strange without heresy: I did
converse this quondam day with a companion of the Kings, who is entitled,
nominated, or called, Don Adriano de Armatho


Noui hominum tanquam te, His humor is lofty, his discourse peremptory: his
tongue filed, his eye ambitious, his gate maiesticall, and his general
behavior vain, ridiculous, and thrasonicall. He is too picked, too spruce,
too affected, too odd, as it were, too peregrinat, as I may call it


A most singular and choice Epithat,


He draws out the thread of his verbositie, finer then the staple of his
argument. I abhor such phanaticall phantasims, such insociable and point devise
companions, such rackers of ortagriphie, as to speak dout fine, when he should
say doubt; det, when he should pronounce debt; de^t, not det: he clepeth a Calf,
Caufe: half, haufe: neighbor vocatur nebour; neigh abreuiated ne: this is
abominable, which he would call abominable: it insinuates me of infamy: ne
inteligis domine, to make franti^ke, lunaticke


Laus deo, been intelligo.


Bome boon for boon prescian, a little scratcht, 'twil serve.


Vides ne quis venit?


Video, and gaudio.


Chirra.


Quar^ Chirra, not Sir?


Men of peace well incountred.


Most millitarie sir salutation*


They have been at a great feast of Languages, and stolen the scraps.


O they have lived long on the almes-basket of words. I marvel thy M. has not
eaten thee for a word, for thou art not so long by the head as
honorificabilitudinitatibus: Thou art easier swallowed then a flap dragon


Peace, the peale begins.


Mounsier, are you not lettred?


Yes, yes, he ^eaches boys the Horne-booke:
What is Abspeld backward with the horn on his head?

Ba, puericia with a horn added.


Ba most seely Sheep, with a horn: you hear his learning.


Quis quis, thou Consonant?


The last of the five Vowels if You repeat them, or the fifth if I.


I will repeat them: a e I.


The She^pe, the other two concludes it o u.


Now by the salt wave of the mediteranium, a sweet tutch, a quick vene we of
wit, snip snap, quick and home, it rejoices my intellect, true wit


Offered by a child to an old man: which is wit-old.


What is the figure? What is the figure?


Horns.


Thou disputes like an Infant: go whip thy Gigge.


Lend me your Horn to make one, and I will whip about your Infamy vnum cita a
gigge of a Cuckolds horn


And I had but one penny in the world, thou should have it to buy Ginger
bread: Hold, there is the very Remuneration I had of thy Master, thou
halfpenny purse of wit, thou Pidgeon-egge of discretion. O and the heavens were
so pleased, that thou were but my Bastard; What a joyful father would thou
make me? Go to, thou have it ad dungil, at the fingers ends, as they say


Oh I smell false Latin, dunghel for vnguem.


Arts-man preambulat, we will be singled from the barbarous. Do you not
educate youth at the Charghouse on the top of the Mountain


Or Mons the hill.


At your sweet pleasure, for the Mountain.


I do sans question.


Sir, it is the Kings most sweet pleasure and affection, to congratulate the
Princess at her Pauilion, in the posteriors of this day, which the rude
multitude call the afternoon


The posterior of the day, most generous sir, is liable, congruent, and
measurable for the afternoon: the word is well culd, chose, sweet, and apt I
do assure you sir, I do assure


Sir, the King is a noble Gentleman, and my familiar, I do assure ye very good
friend: for what is inward between us, let it pass. I do beseech thee
remember thy courtesy. I beseech thee apparel thy head: and among other
importunate and most serious designs, and of great import indeed too: but let
that pass, for I must tell thee it will please his Grace (by the world)
sometime to lean upon my poor shoulder, and with his royal finger thus
dally with my excrement, with my mustachio: but sweet heart let that pass. By
the world I recount no fable, some certain special honors it pleases his
greatness to impart to Armado a Soldier, a man of travel, that has seen
the world: but let that pass; the very all of all is: but sweet heart, I do
implore secrecy, that the King would have me present the Princess (sweet
chucke) with some delightful ostentation, or show, or pageant, or anticke, or
fire-worke: Now, understanding that the Curate and your sweet self are good at
such eruptions, and sudden breaking out of mirth ^. i^ were) I have acquainted
you withal, to the end to crave your assistance


Sir, you shall present before her the Nine Worthies. Sir Holofernes, as
concerning some entertainment of time, some show in the posterior of this day,
to be rendered by our assistants the Kings command: and this most gallant,
illustrate and learned Gentleman, before the Princess: I say none so sit as to
present the Nine Worthies


Where will you find men worthy enough to present them?


Joshua, your self: my self, and this gallant gentleman Judas Machabeus; this
Swain (because of his great limme or ^oynt) shall pass Pompey the great, the
Page Hercules


Pardon sir, error: He is not quantity enough for that Worthies thumb, he is
not so big as the end of his Club


Shall I have audience? he shall present Hercules in minority: his enter and
exit shall be strangling a Snake; and I will have an Apology for that purpose


An excellent device: so if any of the audience hiss, you may cry, Well done
Hercules, now thou crushest the Snake; that is the way to make an offense
gracious, though few have the grace to do it


For the rest of the Worthies?


I will play three my self.


Thrice worthy Gentleman.


Shall I tell you a thing?


We attend.


We will have, if this fadge not, an Antique. I beseech you follow.


Via good man Dull, thou have spoken no word all this while.


Nor understood none neither sir.


Alone, we will employ thee.


I Will make one in a dance, or so: or I will play on the taber to the Worthies,
and let them dance the hey


Most Dull, honest Dull, to our sport away.


Sweet hearts we shall be rich ere we depart,
If fairings come thus plentifully in.
A Lady wal'd about with Diamonds: Look you, what I have from the loving King.

Madam, came nothing else along with that?


Nothing but this yes as much love in Rhyme,
As would be crammed up in a sheet of paper
Writ on both sides the lease, margent and all,
That he was feign to seal on Cupids name.

That was the way to make his godhead wax:
For he has been five thousand years a Boy.

I, and a shrewd unhappy gallows too.


You Will nere be friends with him, a killed your sister.


He made her melancholy, sad, and heavy, and so she died: had she been Light
like you, of such a merry nimble stirring spirit, she might a bin a Grandam
ere she died. And so may you: For a light heart lives long


What Is your dark meaning mouse, of this light word?


A light condition in a beauty dark.


We need more light to find your meaning out.


You Will mar the light by taking it in snuff:
Therefore I Will darkely end the argument.

Look what you do, you do it still in th dark.


So do not you, for you are a light Wench.


Indeed I weigh not you, and therefore light.


You weigh me not, O that is you care not for me.


Great reason: for past care, is still past cure.


Well bandied both, a set of Wit well played.
But Rosaline, you have a Favor too?
Who sent it? and what is it?

I would you knew.
And if my face were but as fair as yours.
My Favor were as great, be witness this.
Nay, I have Verses too, I thank Berowne,
The numbers true, and were the numbering too,
I were the fairest goddess on the ground.
I am compared to twenty thousand fairs.
O he has drawn my picture in his letter.

Any thing like?


Much in the letters, nothing in the praise.


Beauteous as Incke: a good conclusion.


Fair as a text B. in a Coppie book.


Ware pensals. How? Let me not die your debtor,
My red Dominicall, my golden letter.
O that your face were full of Ocs.

A Pox of that jest, and I beshrew all Shrowes:
But Katherine, what was sent to you
From fair Dumaine?

Madame, this Glove.


Did he not send you twain?


Yes Madame: and moreover,
Some thousand Verses of a faithful Lover.
A huge translation of hypocrisy,
Vildly compiled, profound simplicity.

This, and these Pearls, to me sent Longauile.
The Letter is too long by half a mile.

I think no less: Do thou wish in heart
The Chain were longer, and the Letter short.

I, or I would these hands might never part.


We are wise girls to mock our Lovers so.


They are worse fools to purchase mocking so.
That same Berowne i will torture ere I go.
O that I knew he were but in by the week,
How I would make him fawn, and beg, and seek,
And wait the season, and observe the times,
And spend his prodigal wits in booteles rimes.
And shape his service wholly to my device,
And make him proud to make me proud that jests.
So pertaunt like would I of resway his state,
That he should be my fool, and I his fate.

None are so surely caught* when they are caught,
As Wit turned fool, folly in Wisdom hatched:
Has wisedoms warrant, and the help of School,
And Wits own grace to grace a learned Fool?

The blood of youth burns not with such excess,
As grauities revolt to wantons be.

Folly in Fools bears not so strong a note,
As fool'ry in the Wise, when Wit does dote:
Since all the power thereof it does apply,
To prove by Wit, worth in simplicity.

Here comes Boyet, and mirth in his face.


O I am stabbed with laughter, Where Is her Grace?


Thy news Boyet?


Prepare Madame, prepare.
Arm Wenches arm, incounters mounted are,
Against your Peace, Love does approach, disguised:
Armed in arguments, you will be surpised.
Muster your Wits, stand in your own defense,
Or hide your heads like Cowards, and fly hence.

Saint Dennis to S. Cupid: What are they,
That charge their breath against us? Say scout say.

Under the cool shade of a Siccamore,
I thought to close mine eyes some half an hour:
When lo to interrupt my purposed rest,
Toward that shade I might behold addressed,
The King and his companions: warely
I stole into a neighbor thicket by,
And ouer-heard, what you shall ouer-heare:
That by and by disguised they will be here.
Their Herald is a pretty knauish Page:
That well by heart has con'd his embassage,
Action and accent did they teach him there.
Thus must thou speak, and thus thy body bear.
And ever and anon they made a doubt,
Presence maiesticall would put him out:
For quoth the King, an Angel shall thou see:
Yet fear not thou, but speak audaciously.
The Boy replied, An Angel is not evil:
I should have feared her, had she been a devil*
With that all laughed, and clapped him on the shoulder,
Making the bold wagg by their praises bolder.
One rubbed his elboe thus, and fleer'd, and swore,
A better speech was never spoke before.
Another with his finger and his thumb,
Cried via, we will do it, come what will come.
The third he caper'd and cried, All goes well.
The fourth turned on the toe, and down he fell:
With that they all did tumble on the ground,
With such a zealous laughter so profound,
That in this spleen ridiculous appears,
To check their folly passions solemn tears.

But what, but what, come they to visit us?


They do, they do; and are apparel'd thus,
Like Muscouites, or Russians, as I guess.
Their purpose is to parlee, to court, and dance,
And every one his Loue-feat will advance,
Unto his several Mistress: which they will know
By favors several, which they did bestow.

And will they so? the Gallants shall be taskt:
For Ladies; we will every one be maskt,
And not a man of them shall have the grace
Despite of suit, to see a Ladies face.
Hold Rosaline, this Favor thou shall wear,
And then the King will court thee for his Dear:
Hold, take thou this my sweet, and give me thine,
So shall Berowne take me for Rosaline.
And change your Favors too, so shall your Loves
Woo contrary, deceived by these remoues.

Come on then, wear the favors most in sight.


But in this changing, What is your intent?


The effect of my intent is to cross theirs:
They do it but in mocking merriment,
And mock for mock is only my intent.
Their several counsels they vnbosome shall,
To Loves mistook, and so be mocked withal.
Upon the next occasion that we meet,
With Visages displayed to talk and greet.

But shall we dance, if they desire us to it?


No, to the death we will not move a foot,
Nor to their penned speech render we no grace:
But while it is spoke, each turn away his face.

Why that contempt will kill the keepers heart,
And quite divorce his memory from his part.

Therefore I do it, and I make no doubt,
The rest will ere come in, if he be out.
There Is no such sport, as sport by sport orethrowne:
To make theirs ours, and ours none but our own.
So shall we stay mocking intended game,
And they well mocked, depart away with shame.

The Trompet sounds, be maskt, the maskers come.


All hail, the richest Beauties on the earth.


Beauties no richer then rich Taffata.


A holy parcel of the fairest dames that ever turned their backs to mortal
viewes.


Their eyes villain, their eyes.


That ever turned their eyes to mortal viewes.
Out

True, out indeed.


Out of your favors heavenly spirits vouchsafe
Not to behold.

Once to behold, rogue.


Once to behold with your Sun beamed eyes,
With your Sun beamed eyes.

They will not answer to that Epythite,
You were best call it Daughter beamed eyes.

They do not mark me, and that brings me out.


Is this your perfectness? be gone you rogue.


What would these strangers?
Know their minds Boyet.
If they do speak our language, it is our will
That some plain man recount their purposes.
Know what they would?

What would you with the Princes?


Nothing but peace, and gentle visitation.


What would they, say they?


Nothing but peace, and gentle visitation.


Why that they have, and bid them so be gone.


She says you have it, and you may be gone.


Say to her we have measured many miles,
To tread a Measure with you on the grass.

They say that they have measured many a mile,
To tread a Measure with you on this grass.

It is not so. Ask them how many inches
Is in one mile? If they have measured many,
The measure then of one is easlie told:

If to come hither, you have measured miles,
And many miles: the Princess bids you tell,
How many inches does fill up one mile?

Tell her we measure them by weary steps.


She hears her self.


How many weary steps,
Of many weary miles you have ore-gone,
Are numbered in the travel of one mile?

We number nothing that we spend for you,
Our duty is so rich, so infinite,
That we may do it still without account.
Vouchsafe to show the sunshine of your face,
That we (like savages) may worship it.

My face is but a Moon, and clouded too.


Blessed are clouds, to do as such clouds do.
Vouchsafe bright Moon, and these thy stars to shine,
(Those clouds removed) upon our waterie eyne.

O vain peticioner, beg a greater matter,
Thou now requests but Mooneshine in the water.

Then in our measure, vouchsafe but one change.
Thou bidst me beg, this begging is not strange.

Play music then: nay you must do it soon.
Not yet no dance: thus change I like the Moon.

Will you not dance? How come you thus estranged?


You took the Moon at full, but now she is changed?


Yet still she is the Moon, and I the Man.


The music plays, vouchsafe some motion to it: Our ears vouchsafe it.


But your legs should do it.


Since you are strangers, and come here by chance,
We Will not be nice, take hands, we will not dance.

Why take you hands then?


Only to part friends.
Curtsie sweet hearts, and so the Measure ends.

More measure of this measure, be not nice.


We can afford no more at such a price.


Prise your selves: What buys your company?


Your absence only.


That can never be.


Then cannot we be bought: and so adue,
Twice to your Visore, and half once to you.

If you deny to dance, let us hold more chat.


In private then.


I am best pleased with that.


White handed Mistress, one sweet word with thee.


Honey, and Milk, and Sugar: there is three.


Nay then two treyes, an if you grow so nice
Methegline, Wort, and Malmsey; well run dice:
There Is half a dozen sweets.

Seventh sweet adue, since you can cogg,
I Will play no more with you.

One word in secret.


Let it not be sweet.


Thou greeu'st my gall.


Gall, bitter.


Therefore meet.


Will you vouchsafe with me to change a word?


Name it.


Fair Lady.


Say you so? Fair Lord:
Take you that for your fair Lady.

Please it you,
As much in private, and I Will bid adieu.

What, was your vizard made without a tongue?


I know the reason Lady why you ask.


O for your reason, quickly sir, I long.


You have a double tongue within your mask.
And would afford my speechless vizard half.

Veale quoth the Dutchman: is not Veale a Calfe?


A Calfe fair Lady?


No, a fair Lord Calfe.


Let Us part the word.


No, I Will not be your half:
Take all and weane it, it may prove an Ox.

Look how you but your self in those sharp mockes.
Will you give horns chaste Lady? Do not so.

Then die a Calfe before your horns do grow.


One word in private with you ere I die.


Bleat softly then, the Butcher hears you cry.


The tongues of mocking wenches are as keen
As is the Razors edge, invisible:
Cutting a smaller hair then may be seen,
Above the sense of sense so sensible:
Seems their conference, their conceits have wings,
Fleeter then arrows, bullets wind, thought, swifter things

Not one word more my maids, break off, break off.


By heaven, all dry beaten with pure scoff.


Farewell mad Wenches, you have simple wits.


Twenty adieus my frozen Muscouits.
Are these the breed of wits so wondered at?

Tapers they are, with your sweet breathes puffed out.


Wel-liking wits they have, gross, gross, fat, fat.


O poverty in wit, Kingly poor flout.
Will they not (think you) hang themselves to night?
Or ever but in vizards show their faces:
This pert Berowne was out of countenance quite.

They were all in lamentable cases.
The King was weeping ripe for a good word.

Berowne did swear himself out of all suite.


Dumaine was at my service, and his sword:
No point (quoth I:) my servant straight was mute.

Lord Longauill said I came ore his heart:
And trow you what he called me?

Qualme perhaps.


Yes in good faith.


Go sickness as thou art.


Well, better wits have worn plain statute caps,
But vvil you hear; the King is my love sworn.

And quick Berowne has plighted faith to me.


And Longauill was for my service borne.


Dumaine is mine as sure as bark on tree.


Madam, and pretty mistresses give care,
Immediately they will again be here
In their own shapes: for it can never be,
They will digest this harsh indignity.

Will they return?


They will they will, God knows,
And leap for joy, though they are lame with blows:
Therefore change Favors, and when they repair,
Blow like sweet Roses, in this summer air.

How blovv? how blovv? Speak to be understood.


Fair Ladies maskt, are Roses in their bud:
Dismaskt, their damask sweet commixture shown,
Are Angels vailing clouds, or Roses blown.

Auant perplexity: What shall we do,
If they return in their own shapes to woe?

Good Madam, if by me you will be advised,
Let Us mock them still as well known as disguised:
Let us complain to them what fools were hear,
Disguised like Muscouites in shapelesse gear:
And wonder what they were, and to what end
Their shallow shows, and Prologue vildely penned:
And their rough carriage so ridiculous,
Should be presented at our Tent to us.

Ladies, withdraw: the gallants are at hand.


Whip to our Tents, as Roes runs ore Land.


Fair sir, God save you. Where Is the Princess?


Gone to her Tent.
Please it your Majesty command me any service to her?

That she vouchsafe me audience for one word.


I will, and so will she, I know my Lord.


This fellow pickes up wit as Pigeons pease,
And vtters it again, when Jove does please.
He is Wits Peddler, and retailes his Wares,
At Wakes, and Wassels, Meetings, M^kets, Faires.
And we that sell by gross, the Lord does know,
Have not the grace to grace it with such show.
This Gallant pins the Wenches on his sleeue.
Had he bin Adam, he had tempted Eve.
He can carue too, and lispe: Why this is he,
That kissed away his hand in courtesy.
This is the Ape of Form, Monsieur the nice,
That when he plays at Tables, chides the Dice
In honorable terms: Nay he can sing
A mean most meanly, and in Vshering
Mend him who can: the Ladies call him sweet.
The stairs as he treads on them kiss his feet.
This is the flower that smiles on every one,
To show his teeth as white as Whales bone.
And consciences that will not die in debt,
Pay him the duty of honie-tongued Boyet.

A blister on his sweet tongue with my heart,
That put Armathoes Page out of his part.

See where it comes. Behavior what were thou,
Till this madman showed thee? And what art thou now?

All hail sweet Madame, and fair time of day.


Fair in all Hail is foul, as I conceive.


Construe my speeches better, if you may.


Then wish me better, I will give you leave.


We came to visit you, and purpose now
To lead you to our Court, vouchsafe it then.

This field shall hold me, and so hold your vow:
Nor God, nor I, delights in perjured men.

Rebuke me not for that which you provoke:
The virtue of your eye must break my oath.

You nickname virtue: vice you should have spoke:
For virtues office never breaks men troth.
Now by my maiden honor, yet as pure
As the vnsallied Lilly, I protest,
A world of torments though I should endure,
I would not yield to be your houses guest:
So much I hate a breaking cause to be
Of heavenly oaths, vowed with integrity.

O you have lived in desolation here,
Unseen, unvisited, much to our shame.

Not so my Lord, it is not so I swear,
We have had pastimes here, and pleasant game,
A mess of Russians left us but of late.

How Madam? Russians?


I in truth, my Lord.
Trim gallants, full of Courtship and of state.

Madam speak true. It is not so my Lord:
My Lady (to the manner of the days)
In courtesy gives undeserving praise.
We four indeed confronted were with four
In Russia habit: Here they stayed an hour,
And talked apace: and in that hour (my Lord)
They did not bless us with one happy word.
I dare not call them fools; but this I think,
When they are thirsty, fools would feign have drink.

This jest is dry to me. Gentle sweet,
Your wits makes wise things foolish when we greet
With eyes best seeing, heavens fiery eye:
By light we loose light; your capacity
Is of that nature, that to your huge stoore,
Wise things seem foolish, and rich things but poor.

This proves you wise and rich: for in my eye


I am a fool, and full of poverty.


But that you take what does to you belong,
It were a fault to snatch words from my tongue.

O, I am yours and all that I possess.


All the fool mine.


I cannot give you less.


Which of the Vizards what it that you wore?


Where? when? What Vizard?
Why demand you this?

There, then, that vizard, that superfluous case,
That hid the worse, and showed the better face.

We are discried,
They Will mock us now downeright.

Let us confess, and turn it to a jest.


Amazed my Lord? Why looks your Highness sad?


Help hold his brows, he will sound: why look you pale?
Sea-sicke I think coming from Muscouie.

Thus pour the stars down plagues for perjury.
Can any face of brass hold longer out?
Here stand I Lady dart thy skill at me,
Bruise me with scorn, confound me with a flout.
Thrust thy sharp wit quite through my ignorance.
Cut me to pieces with thy keen conceit:
And I will wish thee never more to dance,
Nor never more in Russian habit wait.
O! never will I trust to speeches penned,
Nor to the motion of a Schoole-boies tongue
Nor never come in vizard to my friend,
Nor woo in rhyme like a blind-harpers songue,
Taffata phrases, silken terms precise,
Three-pil'd Hyperboles, spruce affection;
Figures pedanticall, these summer flies,
Have blown me full of maggot ostentation.
I do forswear them, and I here protest,
By this white Glove (how white the hand God knows)
Henceforth my woing mind shall be expressed
In russet yeas, and honest kersie noes.
And to begin Wench, so God help me law,
My love to thee is sound, sans crack or flaw.

Sans, sans, I pray you.


Yet I have a trick
Of the old rage: bear with me, I am sick.
I Will leave it by degrees: soft, let us see,
Write Lord have mercy on us, on those three,
They are infected, in their hearts it lies:
They have the plague, and caught it of your eyes:
These Lords are visited, you are not free:
For the Lords tokens on you do I see.

No, they are free that gave these tokens to us.


Our states are forfeit, seek not to undo us.


It is not so; for how can this be true,
That you stand forfeit, being those that sue.

Peace, for I will not have to do with you.


Nor shall not, if I do as I intend.


Speak for your selves, my wit is at an end.


Teach us sweet Madame, for our rude transgression, some fair excuse.


The fairest is confession.
Were you not here but even now, disguised?

Madam, I was.


And were you well advised?


I was fair Madam.


When you then were here,
What did you whisper in your Ladies ear?

That more then all the world I did respect her


When she shall challenge this, you will reject her.


Upon mine Honor no.


Peace, peace, forbear: your oath once broke, you force not to forswear.


Despise me when I break this oath of mine.


I will, and therefore keep it. Rosaline,
What did the Russian whisper in your ear?

Madam, he swore that he did hold me dear
As precious eyesight, and did value me
Above this World: adding thereto moreover,
That he would Wed me, or else die my Lover.

God give thee joy of him: the Noble Lord Most honorably does uphold his word.


What mean you Madame?
By my life, my troth,
I never swore this Lady such an oath.

By heaven you did; and to confirm it plain, you gave me this: But take it
sir again


My faith and this, the Princess I did give,
I knew her by this Jewel on her sleeue.

Pardon me sir, this Jewel did she wear,
And Lord Berowne (I thank him) is my dear.
What? Will you have me, or your Pearl again?

Neither of either, I remit both twain.
I see the trick on it: Here was a consent,
Knowing aforehand of our merriment,
To dash it like a Christmas Comedy.
Some carry-tale, some please-man, some slight Zanie,
Some mumble-newes, some trencher-knight, some Dick
That smiles his cheek in years, and knows the trick
To make my Lady laugh, when she is disposed;
Told our intents before: which once disclosed,
The Ladies did change Favors, and then we
Following the signs, wooed but the sign of she.
Now to our perjury, to add more terror,
We are again forsworn in will and error.
Much upon this it is: and might not you
Forestall our sport, to make us thus untrue?
Do not you know my Ladies foot by 'th squier?
And laugh upon the apple of her eye?
And stand between her back sir, and the fire,
Holding a trencher, jesting merrily?
You put our Page out: go, you are alowd.
Die when you will, a smock shall be your shroud.
You leere upon me, do you? There Is an eye
Wounds like a Leaden sword.

Full merrily has this brave manager, this carreere been run.


Lo, he is tilting straight. Peace, I have don.
Welcome pure wit, thou part'st a fair fray.

O Lord sir, they would kno,
Whether the three worthies shall come in, or no.

What, are there but three?


No sir, but it is var^ fine,
For every one pursents three.

And three times thrice is nine.


Not so sir, under correction sir, I hope it is not so. You cannot beg us sir,
I can assure you sir, we know what we know: I hope sir three times thrice sir


Is not nine.


Under correction sir, we know where-vntill it does amount.


By Jove, I always took three threes for nine.


O Lord sir, it were pity you should get your living by reckning sir.


How much is it?


O Lord sir, the parties themselves, the actors sir will show where-vntill it
does amount: for mine own part, I am (as they say, but to perfect one man in
one poor man) Pompion the great sir


Art thou one of the Worthies?


It pleased them to think me worthy of Pompey the great: for mine own part,
I know not the degree of the Worthy, but I am to stand for him


Go, bid them prepare.


We will turn it finely off sir, we will take some care.


Berowne, they will shame us:
Let them not approach.

We are shame-proofe my Lord: and it is some policy, to have one show worse
then the Kings and his company


I say they shall not come.


Nay my good Lord, let me ore-rule you now;
That sport best pleases, that does least know how.
Where Zeal strives to content, and the contents
Dies in the Zeal of that which it presents:
Their form confounded, makes most form in mirth,
When great things laboring perish in their birth.

A right description of our sport my Lord.


Anointed, I implore so much expense of thy royal sweet breath, as will utter
a brace of words


Does this man serve God?


Why ask you?


He speak's not like a man of God's making.


That Is all one my fair sweet honey Monarch: For I protest, the Schoolmaster
is exceeding fantastical: Too too vain, too too vain. But we will put it (as
they say) to Fortuna delaguar, I wish you the peace of mind most royal
cupplement


Here is like to be a good presence of Worthies; He presents Hector of Troy,
the Swain Pompey ye great, the Parish Curate Alexander, Armadoes Page
Hercules, the Pedant Judas Machabeus: And if these four Worthies in their
first show thrive, these four will change habites, and present the other five


There is five in the first show.


You are deceived, it is not so.


The Pedant, the Braggart, the Hedge-Priest, the Fool, and the Boy,
Abate throw at Novum, and the whole world again,
Cannot prick out five such, take each one in's vain.

The ship is under sail, and here she coms amain.


I Pompey am.


You lie, you are not he.


I Pompey am.


With Libbards head on knee.


Well said old mocker,
I must needs be friends with thee.

I Pompey am, Pompey surnamed the big.


The great.


It is great sir: Pompey surnamed the great:
That often in field, with Targe and Shield, did make my foe to sweat:
And travailing along this coast, I here am come by chance,
And lay my Arms before the legs of this sweet Less of France.
If your Ladyship would say thanks Pompey, I had done.

Great thanks great Pompey.


It Is not so much worth: but I hope I was perfect. I made a little fault in
great


My hat to a halfe-penie, Pompey proves the best Worthy.


When in the world I lived, I was the worlds Commander:
By East, West, North, and South, I spread my conquering might
My Scutcheon plain declares that I am Alisander.

Your nose says no, you are not:
For it stands too right.

Your nose smells no, in this most tender smelling Knight.


The Conqueror is dismayed:
Proceed good Alexander.

When in the world I lived, I was the worlds Commander.


Most true, it is right: you were so Alisander.


Pompey the great.


your servant and Costard.


Take away the Conqueror, take away Alisander


O sir, you have overthrown Alisander the conqueror: you will be scraped out
of the painted cloth for this: your Lion that holds his Pollax sitting on a
close stool, will be given to Ajax. He will be the ninth worthy. A Conqueror,
and afraid to speak? Run away for shame Alisander. There an't shall please
you: a foolish mild man, an honest man, look you, and soon dashed. He is a
marvelous good neighbor insooth, and a very good Bowler: but for Alisander,
alas you see, how it is a little ore-parted. But there are Worthies a coming,
will speak their mind in some other sort


Stand aside good Pompey.


Great Hercules is presented by this Impe,
Whose Club killed Cerberus that three-headed Canus,
And when he was a babe, a child, a shrimpe,
Thus did he strangle Serpents in his Manus:
Quoniam, he seems in minority,
Ergo, I come with this Apology.
Keep some state in thy exit, and vanish.

Judas I am.


A Judas?


Not Iscariot sir.
Judas I am, ycliped Machabeus.

Judas Machabeus clipped, is plain Judas.


A kissing traitor. How art thou proved Judas?


Judas I am.


The more shame for you Judas.


What mean you sir?


To make Judas hang himself.


Begin sir, you are my elder.


Well followed, Judas was hanged on an Elder.


I will not be put out of countenance.


Because thou have no face.


What is this?


A Citterne head.


The head of a bodkin.


A deaths face in a ring.


The face of an old Roman coin, scarce seen.


The pummell of Caesar's Faulchion.


The caru'd-bone face on a Flaske.


S. Georges half cheek in a brooch.


I, and in a brooch of Lead.


I, and worn in the cap of a Tooth-drawer.
And now forward, for we have put thee in countenance

You have put me out of countenance.


False, we have given thee faces.


But you have out-fac'd them all.


And thou were a Lion, we would do so.


Therefore as he is, an Ass, let him go:
And so adieu sweet Jude. Nay, why do thou stay?

For the latter end of his name.


For the Ass to the Jude: give it him. Iud-as away.


This is not generous, not gentle, not humble.


A light for monsieur Judas, it grows dark, he may stumble.


Alas poor Machabeus, how has he been baited.


Hide thy head Achilles, here comes Hector in Arms.


Though my mockes come home by me, I will now be merry.


Hector was but a Troyan in respect of this.


But is this Hector?


I think Hector was not so ^leane timber'd.


His leg is too big for Hector.


More Calfe certain.


No, he is best endued in the small.


This cannot be Hector.


He Is a God or a Painter, for he makes faces.


The Armipotent Mars, of Lances the almighty, gave Hector a gift.


A gilt Nutmegge.


A Lemmon.


Stuck with Cloves.


No cloven.


The Armipotent Mars of Lances the almighty,
Gave Hector a gift, the heir of Illion;
A man so breathed, that certain he would fight: yea
From morn till night, out of his Pauillion.
I am that Flower.

That Mint.


That Cullambine.


Sweet Lord Longauill reine thy tongue.


I must rather give it the reine: for it runs against Hector.


I, and Hector's a Greyhound.


The sweet War-man is dead and rotten,
Sweet chuckes, beat not the bones of the buried:
But I will forward with my device;
Sweet Royalty bestow on me the sense of hearing.

Speak brave Hector, we are much delighted.


I do adore thy sweet Graces slipper.


Loves her by the foot.


He may not by the yard.


This Hector far surmounted Hanniball.


Fellow Hector, she is gone; she is two months on her way.


What meanest thou?


Faith unless you play the honest Troyan, the poor Wench is cast away: she is
quick, the child brags in her belly already: it is yours


Do thou infamonize me among Potentates? Thou shall die.


Then shall Hector be whipped for Iaquenetta that is quick by him, and hanged
for Pompey, that is dead by him


Most rare Pompey.


Renowned Pompey.


Greater then great, great, great, great Pompey: Pompey the huge.


Hector trembles.


Pompey is moved, more Atees more Atees stir them, or stir them on.


Hector will challenge him.


I, if a' have no more man's blood in's belly, then will sup a Flea.


By the North Pole I do challenge thee.


I will not fight with a pole like a Northern man; I Will flash, I Will do it by the
sword: I pray you let me borrow my Arms again


Room for the incensed Worthies.


I Will do it in my shirt.


Most resolute Pompey.


Master, let me take you a button hole lower:
Do you not see Pompey is uncasing for the combat: what mean you? you will
lose your reputation

Gentlemen and Soldiers pardon me, I will not combat in my shirt.


You may not deny it, Pompey has made the challenge.


Sweet bloods, I both may, and will.


What reason have you for it?


The naked truth of it is, I have no shirt,
I go woolward for penance.

True, and it was enjoined him in Rome for want of Linen: since when, I Will be
sworn he wore none, but a dishclout of Iaquenettas, and that he wears next
his heart for a favor


God save you Madame.


Welcome Marcade, but that thou interruptest our merriment.


I am sorry Madam, for the news I bring is heavy in my tongue. The King your
fathe


Dead for my life.


Even so: My tale is told.


Worthies away, the Scene begins to cloud.


For mine own part, I breath free breath: I have seen the day of wrong,
through the little hole of discretion, and I will right my self like a
Soldier


How fare's your Majesty?


Boyet prepare, I will away to night.


Madame not so, I do beseech you stay.


Prepare I say. I thank you gracious Lords
For all your fair endeavors and entreats:
Out of a new sad-soule, that you vouchsafe,
In your rich wisdom to excuse, or hide,
The liberal opposition of our spirits,
If ouer-boldly we have borne our selves,
In the converse of breath (your gentleness
Was guilty of it.) Farewell worthy Lord:
A heavy heart bears not a humble tongue.
Excuse me so, coming so short of thanks,
For my great suite, so easily obtained.

The extreme parts of time, extremely forms
All causes to the purpose of his speed:
And often at his very loose-decides
That, which long process could not arbitrate.
And though the mourning brow of progeny
Forbid the smiling courtesy of Love:
The holy suite which feign it would convince,
Yet since loves argument was first on foot,
Let not the cloud of sorrow iustle it
From what it purposed: since to wail friends lost,
Is not by much so wholesome profitable,
As to rejoice at friends but newly found,

I understand you not, my greefes are double.


Honest plain words, best pierce the ears of grief
And by these badges understand the King,
For your fair sakes have we neglected time,
Played foul play with our oaths: your beauty Ladies
Has much deformed us, fashioning our humors
Even to the opposed end of our intents.
And what in us has seemed ridiculous:
As Love is full of unbefitting strains,
All wanton as a child, skipping and vain.
Formed by the eye, and therefore like the eye.
Full of straying shapes, of habits, and of forms
Varying in subjects as the eye does roll,
To every varied object in his glance:
Which partie-coated presence of loose love
Put on by us, if in your heavenly eyes,
Have misbecom'd our oaths and grauities.
Those heavenly eyes that look into these faults,
Suggested us to make: therefore Ladies
Our love being yours, the error that Love makes
Is likewise yours. We to our selves prove false,
By being once false, for ever to be true
To those that make us both, fair Ladies you.
And even that falsehood in it self a sin,
Thus purifies it self, and turns to grace.

We have received your Letters, full of Love:
Your Favors, the Ambassadors of Love.
And in our maiden counsel rated them,
At courtship, pleasantiest, and courtesy,
As bumbast and as lining to the time:
But more devout then these are our respects
Have we not been, and therefore met your loves
In their own fashion, like a merriment.

Our letters Madam, showed much more then jest.


So did our looks.


We did not coat them so.


Now at the latest minute of the hour,
Grant us your loves.

A time me thinks too short,
To make a world-without-end bargain in;
No, no my Lord, your Grace is perjured much,
Full of dear guiltiness, and therefore this:
If for my Love (as there is no such cause)
You will do ought, this shall you do for me.
Your oath I will not trust: but go with speed
To some forlorn and naked Hermitage,
Remote from all the pleasures of the world:
There stay, until the twelve Celestial Signs
Have brought about their annual reckoning.
If this austere insociable life,
Change not your offer made in heat of blood:
If frosts, and fasts, hard lodging, and thin weeds
Nip not the gaudie blossoms of your Love,
But that it bear this trial, and last love:
Then at the expiration of the year,
Come challenge me, challenge me by these deserts,
And by this Virgin palm, now kissing thine,
I will be thine: and till that instant shut
My woeful self up in a mourning house,
Raining the tears of lamentation,
For the remembrance of my Fathers death.
If this thou do deny, let our hands part,
Neither entitled in the others heart.

If this, or more then this, I would deny,
To flatter up these powers of mine with rest,
The sudden hand of death close up mine eye.
Hence ever then, my heart is in thy breast.

And what to me my Love? and what to me?


You must be purged too, your sins are racked.
You are attaint with faults and perjury:
Therefore if you my favor mean to get,
A tweluemonth shall you spend, and never rest,
But seek the weary beds of people sick.

But what to me my love? but what to me?


A wife? a beard, fair health, and honesty,
With threefold love, I wish you all these three.

O shall I say, I thank you gentle wife?


Not so my Lord, a tweluemonth and a day,
I Will mark no words that smoothfac'd wooers say.
Come when the King does to my Lady come:
Then if I have much love, I Will give you some.

I Will serve thee true and faithfully till then.


Yet swear not, least ye be forsworn again*


What says Maria?


At the tweluemonths end,
I Will change my black Gown, for a faithful friend.

I Will stay with patience: but the time is long.


The liker you, few taller are so young.


Studies my Lady? Mistress, look on me,
Behold the window of my heart, mine eye:
What humble suite attends thy answer there,
Impose some service on me for my love.

Often have I heard of you my Lord Berowne,
Before I saw you: and the worlds large tongue
Proclaims you for a man repleate with mockes,
Full of comparisons, and wounding floutes:
Which you on all estates will execute,
That lie within the mercy of your wit.
To weed this Wormwood from your fruitful brain,
And therewithal to win me, if you please,
Without the which I am not to be won:
You shall this tweluemonth term from day to day,
Visit the speechless sick, and still converse
With groaning wretches: and your task shall be,
With all the fierce endeavor of your wit,
To enforce the pained impotent to smile.

To move wild laughter in the throat of death?
It cannot be, it is impossible.
Mirth cannot move a soul in agony.

Why that is the way to choke a gibing spirit,
Whose influence is begot of that loose grace,
Which shallow laughing hearers give to fools:
A jests prosperity, lies in the ear
Of him that hears it, never in the tongue
Of him that makes it: then, if sickly ears,
Deaft with the clamors of their own dear groans,
Will hear your idle scorns; continue then,
And I will have you, and that fault withal.
But if they will not, throw away that spirit,
And I shall find you empty of that fault,
Right joyful of your reformation.

A tweluemonth? Well: befall what will befall,
I Will jest a tweluemonth in an Hospital.

I sweet my Lord, and so I take my leave.


No Madam, we will bring you on your way.


Our woing does not end like an old Play:
Jack has not Gill: these Ladies courtesy
Might well have made our sport a Comedy.

Come sir, it wants a tweluemonth and a day,
And then 'twil end.

That Is too long for a play.


Sweet Majesty vouchsafe me.


Was not that Hector?


The worthy Knight of Troy.


I will kiss thy royal finger, and take leave. I am a Votarie, I have vowed to
Iaquenetta to hold the Plough for her sweet love three years. But most
esteemed greatness, will you hear the Dialogue that the two Learned men have
compiled, in praise of the Owl and the Cuckoo? It should have followed in the
end of our show


Call them forth quickly, we will do so.


Holla, Approach.


This side is Hiems, Winter.
This Ver, the Spring: the one maintained by the Owl,
The other by the Cuckoo.
Ver, begin.
When Dasies pied, and Violets blew,
And Cuckow-buds of yellow hew:
And Ladie-smockes all silver white,
Do paint the Meadows with delight.
The Cuckoo then on every tree,
Mockes married men, for thus sings he,
Cuckoo.
Cuckoo, Cuckoo: O word of fear,
Unpleasing to a married ear.
When Shepherds pipe on Oaten strawes,
And merry Larkes are Ploughmens clockes:
When Turtles tread, and Rookes and Dawes,
And Maidens bleach their summer smockes:
The Cuckoo then on every tree
Mockes married men; for thus sings he,
Cuckoo.
Cuckoo, Cuckoo: O word of fear,
Unpleasing to a married ear.
When Isicles hang by the wall,
And Dicke the Sphepheard blows his nail;
And Tom bears Logges into the hall,
And Milk comes frozen home in paile:
When blood is nipt, and ways be foul,
Then nightly sings the staring Owl
Tu-whit to-who.
A merry note,
While greasy Ione does keele the pot.
When all aloud the wind does blow,
And cossing drownes the Parsons saw:
And birds sit brooding in the snow,
And Marrians nose looks red and raw:
When roasted Crabs hiss in the bowl,
Then nightly sings the staring Owl,
Tu-whit to who:
A merry note,
While greasy Ione does keele the pot.
The Words of Mercury,
Are harsh after the songs of Apollo:
You that way; we this way.


