EScalus.


My Lord.


Of Government, the properties to unfold,
Would seem in me to affect speech and discourse,
Since I am put to know, that your own Science
Exceedes (in that) the lists of all advice
My strength can give you: Then no more remains
But that, to your sufficiency, as your worth is able,
And let them work: The nature of our People,
Our Cities Institutions, and the Terms
For Common Justice, y' are as pregnant in
As Art, and practice, has enriched any
That we remember: There is our Commission,
From which, we would not have you warpe; call hither,
I say, bid come before us Angelo:
What figure of us think you, he will bear.
For you must know, we have with special soul
Elected him our absence to supply;
Lent him our terror, dressed him with our love,
And given his Deputation all the Organs
Of our own power: What think you of it?

If any in Vienna be of worth
To undergo such ample grace, and honor,
It is Lord Angelo.

Look where he comes.


Always obedient to your Graces will*
I come to know your pleasure.

Angelo:
There is a kind of Character in thy life,
That to the obseruer, does thy history
Fully unfold: Thy self, and thy belongings
Are not thine own so proper, as to waste
Thy self upon thy virtues; they on thee:
Heaven does with us, as we, with Torches do,
Not light them for themselves: For if our virtues
Did not go forth of us, 'twere all alike
As if we had them not: Spirits are not finely touched,
But to fine issues: nor nature never lends
The smallest scruple of her excellence,
But like a thrifty goddess, she determines
Her self the glory of a creditour,
Both thanks, and use; but I do bend my speech
To one that can my part in him advertise;
Hold therefore Angelo:
In our remove, be thou at full, our self:
Mortallitie and Mercy in Vienna
Live in thy tongue, and heart: Old Escalus
Though first in question, is thy secondary.
Take thy Commission.

Now good my Lord
Let there be some more test, made of my mettle,
Before so noble, and so great a figure
Be stamp't upon it.

No more evasion:
We have with a leauen'd, and prepared choice
Proceeded to you; therefore take your honors:
Our haste from hence is of so quick condition,
That it prefers it self, and leaves vnquestion'd
Matters of needful value: We shall write to you
As time, and our concernings shall importune,
How it goes with us, and do look to know
What does befall you here. So fare you well:
To the hopeful execution do I leave you,
Of your Commissions.

Yet give leave (my Lord*)
That we may bring you something on the way.

My haste may not admit it,
Nor need you (on mine honor) have to do
With any scruple: your scope is as mine own,
So to enforce, or qualify the Laws
As to your soul seems good: Give me your hand,
I Will privily away: I love the people,
But do not like to stage me to their eyes:
Though it do well, I do not relish well
Their loud applause, and Aues vehement:
Nor do I think the man of safe discretion
That does affect it. Once more fare you well.

The heavens give safety to your purposes.


Lead forth, and bring you back in happiness.


I thank you, fare you well.

I shall desire you, Sir, to give me leave
To have free speech with you; and it concerns me
To look into the bottom of my place:
A power I have, but of what strength and nature,
I am not yet instructed.

It Is so with me: Let us withdraw together,
And we may soon our satisfaction have
Touching that point.

I Will wait upon your honor.


If the Duke, with the other Dukes, come not to composition with the King of
Hungary, why then all the Dukes fall upon the King


Heaven grant us its peace, but not the King of Hungaries.


Amen.


Thou conclud'st like the Sanctimonious Pirat, that went to sea with the ten
Commandments, but scraped one out of the Table


Thou shall not Steal?


I, that he razed.


Why? 'twas a commandment, to command the Captain and all the rest from their
functions: they put forth to steal: There Is not a Soldier of us all, that in
the thanksgiving before meat, do rallish the petition well, that prays for
peace


I never heard any Soldier dislike it.


I believe thee: for I think thou never was it where Grace was said.


No? a dozen times at least.


What? In meeter?


In any proportion. or in any language.


I think, or in any Religion.


I, why not? Grace, is Grace, despite of all controversy: as for example;
Thou thy self art a wicked villain, despite of all Grace


Well: there went but a pair of sheeres between us.


I grant: as there may between the Lists, and the Velvet. Thou art the List.


And thou the Velvet; thou art good velvet; you are a three pild-peece I
warrant thee: I had as liefe be a List of an English Kersey, as be pil'd, as
thou art pil'd, for a French Velvet. Do I speak feelingly now


I think thou do: and indeed with most painful feeling of thy speech: I
will, out of thine own confession, learn to begin thy health; but, whilst I
live forget to drink after thee


I think I have done my self wrong, have I not?


Yes, that thou have; whether thou art tainted, or free.


Behold, behold, where Madam Mitigation comes. I have purchased as many
diseases under her Roof, As come t


To what, I pray?


Judge.


To three thousand Dollours a year.


I, and more.


A French crown more.


Thou art always figuring diseases in me; but thou art full of error, I am
sound


Nay, not (as one would say) healthy: but so sound, as things that are hollow;
thy bones are hollow; Impiety has made a feast of thee


How now, which of your hips has the most profound Ciatica?


Well, well: there is one yonder arrested, and carried to prison, was worth five
thousand of you all


Who Is that I pray'thee?


Marry Sir, that is Claudio, Signior Claudio.


Claudio to prison? it is not so.


Nay, but I know it is so: I saw him arrested: saw him carried away: and which
is more, within these three days his head to be chopped off


But, after all this fooling, I would not have it so: Art thou sure of this?


I am too sure of it: and it is for getting Madam Iulietta with child.


Believe me this may be: he promised to meet me two hours since, and he was
ever precise in promise keeping


Besides you know, it draws something near to the speech we had to such a
purpose


But most of all agreeing with the proclamation.


Away: let us go learn the truth of it.


Thus, what with the war; what with the sweat, what with the gallows, and what
with poverty, I am Custom-shrunke. How now? what is the news with you


Yonder man is carried to prison.


Well: what has he done?


A Woman.


But what is his offense?


Groping for Trowts, in a peculiar River.


What? is there a maid with child by him?


No: but there is a woman with maid by him you have not heard of the
proclamation, have you


What proclamation, man?


All howses in the Suburbs of Vienna must be plucked down.


And what shall become of those in the City?


They shall stand for seed: they had gone down to, but that a wise Burger put in
for them


But shall all our houses of resort in the Suburbs be pulled down?


To the ground, Mistress.


Why here is a change indeed in the Commonwealth: what shall become of me?


Come: fear not you: good Counselors lack no Clients: though you change your
place, you need not change your Trade: I Will be your Tapster still; courage,
there will be pity taken on you; you that have worn your eyes almost out in
the service, you will be considered


What Is to do here, Thomas Tapster? let us withdraw?


Here comes Signior Claudio, led by the Provost to prison: and there is Madam
Juliet


Fellow, why do thou show me thus to the world? Bear me to prison, where I
am committed


I do it not in evil disposition, But from Lord Angelo by special charge.


Thus can the demy-god (Authority)
Make us pay down, for our offense, by weight
The words of heaven* on whom it will, it will,
On whom it will not (so) yet still it is just.

Why how now Claudio* whence comes this restraint.


From too much liberty, (my Lucio) Liberty
As surfeit is the father of much fast,
So every Scope by the immoderate use
Turns to restraint: Our Natures do pursue
Like Rats that rauyn down their proper Bane,
A thirsty evil, and when we drink, we die.

If I could speak so wisely under an arrest, I would send for certain of my
Creditors: and yet, to say the truth, I had as lief have the foppery of
freedom, as the mortality of imprisonment: what is thy offense, Claudio


What (but to speak of) would offend again.


What, is it murder?


No.


Lechery?


Call it so.


Away, Sir, you must go.


One word, good friend:
Lucio, a word with you.

A hundred:
If they will do you any good: Is Lechery so looked after?

Thus stands it with me: upon a true contract
I got possession of Iulietas bed,
You know the Lady, she is fast my wife,
Save that we do the denunciation lack
Of outward Order. This we came not to,
Only for propogation of a Dowre
Remaining in the Coffer of her friends,
From whom we thought it meet to hide our Love
Till Time had made them for us. But it chances
The stealth of our most mutual entertainment
With Character too gross, is writ on Juliet.

With child, perhaps?


Unhappily, even so.
And the new Deputy, now for the Duke,
Whether it be the fault and glimpse of newnes,
Or whether that the body public, be
A horse whereon the Governor does ride,
Who newly in the Seat, that it may know
He can command; lets it strait feel the spur:
Whether the Tirranny be in his place,
Or in his Eminence that fills it up
I stagger in: But this new Governor
Awakes me all the enrolled penalties
Which have (like vn-scowr'd Armor) hung by the wall
So long, that ninteene Zodiacks have gone round,
And none of them been worn; and for a name
Now puts the drowsy and neglected Act
Freshly on me: it is surely for a name.

I warrant it is: And thy head stands so tickle on thy shoulders, that a
milke-maid, if she be in love, may sigh it off: Send after the Duke, and
appeal to him


I have done so, but he is not to be found.
I prithee (Lucio) do me this kind service:
This day, my sister should the Cloister enter,
And there receive her approbation.
Acquaint her with the danger of my state,
Implore her, in my voice, that she make friends
To the strict deputy: bid her self assay him,
I have great hope in that: for in her youth
There is a prone and speechless dialect,
Such as move men: beside, she has prosperous Art
When she will play with reason, and discourse,
And well she can persuade.

I pray she may; as well for the encouragement of the like, which else would
stand under grievous imposition: as for the enjoying of thy life, who I would
be sorry should be thus foolishly lost, at a game of ticke-tacke: I Will to her


I thank you good friend Lucio.


Within two hours.


Come Officer, away.


No: holy Father, throw away that thought,
Believe not that the dribling dart of Love
Can pierce a complete bosom: why, I desire thee
To give me secret harbor, has a purpose
More grave, and wrinkled, then the aims, and ends
Of burning youth.

May your Grace speak of it?


My holy Sir, none better knows then you
How I have ever loved the life removed
And held in idle price, to haunt assemblies
Where youth, and cost, witless bravery keeps.
I have deliuerd to Lord Angelo
(A man of stricture and firm abstinence)
My absolute power, and place here in Vienna,
And he supposes me trauaild to Poland,
(For so I have strewed it in the common ear)
And so it is received: Now (pious Sir)
You will demand of me, why I do this.

Gladly, my Lord.


We have strict Statutes, and most biting Laws,
(The needful bits and curbes to headstrong weeds,)
Which for this fourteen years, we have let slip,
Even like an ore-growne Lion in a Cave
That goes not out to prey: Now, as fond Fathers,
Having bound up the threatening twigs of birch,
Only to stick it in their childrens sight,
For terror, not to use: in time the rod
More mocked, then feared: so our Decrees,
Dead to infliction, to themselves are dead,
And liberty, plucks Justice by the nose;
The Baby beats the Nurse, and quite a thwart
Goes all decorum.

It rested in your Grace
To unloose this tyde-vp Justice, when you pleased:
And it in you more dreadful would have seemed
Then in Lord Angelo.

I do fear: too dreadful:
Since 'twas my fault, to give the people scope,
'T would be my tirrany to strike and gall them,
For what I bid them do: For, we bid this be done
When evil deeds have their permissiue pass,
And not the punishment: therefore indeed (my father)
I have on Angelo imposed the office,
Who may in the ambush of my name, strike home,
And yet, my nature never in the fight
To do in slander: And to behold his sway
I will, as 'twere a brother of your Order,
Visit both Prince, and People: Therefore I prithee
Supply me with the habit, and instruct me
How I may formally in person bear
Like a true Friar: More reasons for this action
At our more leisure, shall I render you;
Only, this one: Lord Angelo is precise,
Stands at a guard with Envy: scarce confesses
That his blood flows: or that his appetite
Is more to bread then stone: hence shall we see
If power change purpose: what our Seemers be.

And have you Nuns no farther privileges?


Are not these large enough?


Yes truly; I speak not as desiring more,
But rather wishing a more strict restraint
Upon the Sisterstood, the Votarists of Saint Clare.

Hoa? peace be in this place.


Who Is that which calls?


It is a man's voice: gentle Isabella
Turn you the key, and know his business of him;
You may; I may not: you are yet unsworn:
When you have vowed, you must not speak with men,
But in the presence of the Prioresse;
Then if you speak, you must not show your face;
Or if you show your face, you must not speak:
He calls again: I pray you answer him.

Peace and prosperity: who is it that calls?


Hail Virgin, (if you be) as those cheeke-Roses
Proclaim you are no less: can you so steed me,
As bring me to the fight of Isabella,
A Nouice of this place, and the fair Sister
To her unhappy brother Claudio?

Why her unhappy Brother? Let me ask,
The rather for I now must make you know
I am that Isabella, and his Sister.

Gentle and fair: your Brother kindly greets you;
Not to be weary with you; he is in prison.

Woe me; for what?


For that, which if my self might be his Judge,
He should receive his punishment, in thanks:
He has got his friend with child.

Sir, make me not your story.


It Is true; I would not, though it is my familiar sin,
With Maids to seem the Lap wing, and to jest
Tongue, far from heart: play with all Virgins so:
I hold you as a thing en-skied, and sainted,
By your renouncement, an imortall spirit
And to be talked with in sincerity,
As with a Saint.

You do blaspheme the good, in mocking me.


Do not believe it: fewnes, and truth; it is thus,
Your brother, and his lover have embraced;
As those that feed, grow full: as blossoming Time
That from the seednes, the bare fallow brings
To teeming foyson: even so her plenteous womb
Expresses his full Tilth, and husbandry.

Some one with child by him? my cosen Juliet?


Is she your cosen?


Adoptedly, as schoole-maids change their names By vain, though apt affection.


She it is.


Oh, let him marry her.


This is the point.
The Duke is very strangely gone from hence;
Bore many gentlemen (my self being one)
In hand, and hope of action: but we do learn,
By those that know the very Nerves of State,
His giuing-out, were of an infinite distance
From his true meant design: upon his place,
(And with full line of his authority)
Gouernes Lord Angelo; A man, whose blood
Is very snow-broth: one, who never feels
The wanton stings, and motions of the sense;
But does rebate, and blunt his natural edge
With profits of the mind: Study, and fast
He (to give fear to use, and liberty,
Which have, for long, run-by the hideous law,
As Myce, by Lions) has picked out an act,
Under whose heavy sense, your brothers life
Falls into forfeit: he arrests him on it,
And follows close the rigor of the Statute
To make him an example: all hope is gone,
Unless you have the grace, by your fair prayer
To soften Angelo: And that is my pith of business
'Twixt you, and your poor brother.

Does he so,
Seek his life?

Has censured him already,
And as I hear, the Provost has a warrant
For's execution.

Alas: what poor Abilitie's in me, to do him good.


Assay the power you have.


My power? alas, I doubt.


Our doubts are traitors
And makes us loose the good we often might win,
By fearing to attempt: Go to Lord Angelo
And let him learn to know, when Maidens sue
Men give like gods: but when they weep and kneel,
All their petitions, are as freely theirs
As they themselves would owe them.

I Will see what I can do.


But speedily.


I will about it strait;
No longer staying, but to give the Mother
Notice of my affair: I humbly thank you:
Commend me to my brother: soon at night
I Will send him certain word of my success.

I take my leave of you.


Good sir, adieu.


We must not make a scar-crow of the Law,
Setting it up to fear the Birds of prey,
And let it keep one shape, till custom make it
Their perch, and not their terror.

I, but yet
Let us be keen, and rather cut a little
Then fall, and bruise to death: alas, this gentleman
Whom I would save, had a most noble father,
Let but your honor know
(Whom I believe to be most strait in virtue)
That in the working of your own affections,
Had time coheard with Place, or place with wishing,
Or that the resolute acting of our blood
Could have attained the effect of your own purpose,
Whether you had not sometime in your life
Er'd in this point, which now you censure him,
And pulled the Law upon you.

It Is one thing to be tempted (Escalus)
Another thing to fall: I not deny
The Jury passing on the Prisoners life
May in the sworne-twelue have a thief, or two
Guiltier then him they try; what is open made to Justice,
That Justice ceizes; What knows the Laws
That thieves do pass on thieves? It Is very pregnant,
The Jewel that we find, we stoop, and take it,
Because we see it; but what we do not see,
We tread upon, and never think of it.
You may not so extenuate his offense,
For I have had such faults; but rather tell me
When I, that censure him, do so offend,
Let mine own Judgment pattern out my death,
And nothing come in partial. Sir, he must dye.

Be it as your wisdom will.


Where is the Provost?


Here if it like your honor.


See that Claudio
Be executed by nine to morrow morning,
Bring him his Confessor, let him be prepared,
For that is the utmost of his pilgrimage.

Well: heaven forgive him; and forgive us all:
Some rise by sin, and some by virtue fall:
Some run from brakes of Ice, and answer none,
And some condemned for a fault alone.

Come, bring them away: if these be good people in a Commonweal, that do
nothing but use their abuses in common houses, I know no law: bring them away


How now Sir, what is your name? And what is the matter?


If it please your honor, I am the poor Dukes Constable, and my name is
Elbow; I do lean upon Justice Sir, and do bring in here before your good
honor, two notorious Benefactors


Benefactors? Well: What Benefactors are they? Are they not Malefactors?


If it please your honor, I know not well what they are: But precise villains
they are, that I am sure of and void of all profanation in the world, that
good Christians ought to have


This comes off well: here is a wise Officer.


Go to: What quality are they of? Elbow is your name?
Why do thou not speak Elbow?

He cannot Sir: he is out at Elbow.


What are you Sir?


He Sir: a Tapster Sir: parcel Baud: one that serves a bad woman: whose house
Sir was (as they say) plucked down in the Suborbs: and now she professes a
hot-house; which, I think is a very ill house too


How know you that?


My wife Sir? whom I detest before heaven, and your honor.


How? thy wife?


I Sir: whom I thank heaven is an honest woman.


Do thou detest her therefore?


I say sir, I will detest my self also, as well as she, that this house, if it
be not a Bauds house, it is pity of her life, for it is a naughty house


How do thou know that, Constable?


Marry sir, by my wife, who, if she had bin a woman Cardinally given, might
have bin accused in fornication, adultery, and all vncleanlinesse there


By the woman's means?


I sir, by Mistress Ouer-dons means: but as she spit in his face, so she defide
him


Sir, if it please your honor, this is not so.


Prove it before these varlets here, thou honorable man, prove it.


Do you hear how he misplaces?


Sir, she came in great with child: and longing (saving your honors reverence)
for stewd prewyns; sir, we had but two in the house, which at that very distant
time stood, as it were in a fruit dish (a dish of some three pence; your
honors have seen such dishes) they are not China-dishes, but very good dishes


Go too: go too: no matter for the dish sir.


No indeed sir not of a pin; you are therein in the right: but, to the point:
As I say, this Mistress Elbow, being (as I say) with child, and being great
bellied, and longing (as I said) for prewyns: and having but two in the dish
(as I said) Master Froth here, this very man, having eaten the rest (as I said)
and (as I say) paying for them very honestly: for, as you know Master Froth, I
could not give you three pence again


No indeed.


Very well: you being then (if you be remembered) cracking the stones of the
foresaid prewyns


I, so I did indeed.


Why, very well: I telling you then (if you be remembered) that such a one, and
such a one, were past cure of the thing you wot of, unless they kept very good
diet, as I told you


All this is true.


Why very well then.


Come: you are a tedious fool: to the purpose: what was done to Elbowes wife,
that he has cause to complain of? Come me to what was done to her


Sir, your honor cannot come to that yet.


No sir, nor I mean it not.


Sir, but you shall come to it, by your honors leave: And I beseech you, look
into Master Froth here sir, a man of foure-score pound a year; whose father
died at Hallowmas: Was It not at Hallowmas Master Froth


Allhallond-Eue.


Why very well: I hope here be truths: he Sir, sitting (as I say) in a lower
chair, Sir, 'twas in the bunch of Grapes, where indeed you have a delight to
sit, have you not


I have so, because it is an open room, and good for winter.


Why very well then: I hope here be truths.


This will last out a night in Russia
When nights are longest there: I Will take my leave,
And leave you to the hearing of the cause;
Hoping you will find good cause to whip them all.

I think no less: good morrow to your Lordship. Now Sir, come on: What was
done to Elbowes wife, once more


Once Sir? there was nothing done to her once.


I beseech you Sir, ask him what this man did to my wife.


I beseech your honor, ask me.


Well sir, what did this Gentleman to her?


I beseech you sir, look in this Gentleman's face: good Master Froth look upon
his honor; it is for a good purpose: does your honor mark his face


I sir, very well.


Nay, I beseech you mark it well.


Well, I do so.


Does your honor see any harm in his face?


Why no.


I Will be supposd upon a book, his face is the worst thing about him: good then:
if his face be the worst thing about him, how could Master Froth do the
Constables wife any harm? I would know that of your honor


He Is in the right (Constable) what say you to it?


First, and it like you, the house is a respected house; next, this is a
respected fellow; and his Mistress is a respected woman


By this hand Sir, his wife is a more respected person then any of us all.


Varlet, thou lie; thou lie wicked varlet: the time is yet to come that
she was ever respected with man, woman, or child


Sir, she was respected with him, before he married with her.


Which is the wiser here; Justice or Iniquity? Is this true?


O thou caytiffe: O thou varlet: O thou wicked Hanniball; I respected with her,
before I was married to her? If ever I was respected with her, or she with me,
let not your worship think me the poor Dukes Officer: prove this, thou
wicked Hanniball, or i will have mine action of battry on thee


If he took you a box' oth' ear, you might have your action of slander too.


Marry I thank your good worship for it: what is it your Worships pleasure I
shall do with this wicked Caitiffe


Truly Officer, because he has some offenses in him, that thou would
discover, if thou could, let him continue in his courses, till thou know
what they are


Marry I thank your worship for it: Thou see thou wicked varlet now, what is
come upon thee. Thou art to continue now thou Varlet, thou art to continue


Where were you borne, friend?


Here in Vienna, Sir.


Are you of fourscore pounds a year?


Yes, and 't please you sir.


So: what trade are you of, sir?


A Tapster, a poor widows Tapster.


Your Mistress name?


Mistress Ouer-do^.


Has she had any more then one husband?


Nine, sir: Ouer-don by the last.


Nine? come hither to me, Master Froth; Master Froth, I would not have you
acquainted with Tapsters; they will draw you Master Froth, and you will hang
them: get you gone, and let me hear no more of you


I thank your worship: for mine own part, I never come into any room in a
Tap-house, but I am drawn in


Well: no more of it Master Froth: farewell: Come you hither to me, Mr.
Tapster: what is your name Mr. Tapster


Pompey.


What else?


Bum, Sir.


Troth, and your bum is the greatest thing about you, so that in the beastliest
sense, you are Pompey the great; Pompey, you are partly a bawd, Pompey;
howsoever you color it in being a Tapster, are you not? come, tell me true, it
shall be the better for you


Truly sir, I am a poor fellow that would live.


How would you live Pompey? by being a bawd? what do you think of the trade
Pompey? is it a lawful trade


If the Law would allow it, sir.


But the Law will not allow it Pompey; nor it shall not be allowed in Vienna.


Does your Worship mean to geld and splay all the youth of the City?


No, Pompey.


Truly Sir, in my poor opinion they will to it then: if your worship will
take order for the drabs and the knaves, you need not to fear the bawds


There is pretty orders beginning I can tell you: It is but heading, and
hanging


If you head, and hang all that offend that way but for ten year together;
you will be glad to give out a Commission for more heads: if this law hold in
Vienna ten year, i will rent the fairest house in it after three pence a Bay: if
you live to see this come to pass, say Pompey told you so


Thank you good Pompey; and in requital of your prophecy, hark you: I
advise you let me not find you before me again upon any complaint whatsoever;
no, not for dwelling where you do: if I do Pompey, I shall beat you to your
Tent, and prove a shrewd Caesar to you: in plain dealing Pompey, I shall have
you whipped; so for this time, Pompey, fare you well


I thank your Worship for your good counsel; but I shall follow it as the
flesh and fortune shall better determine. Whip me? no, no, let Carman whip his
Jade, The valiant heart's not whipped out of his trade


Come hither to me, Master Elbow: come hither Master Constable: how long have
you bin in this place of Constable


Seven year, and a half sir.


I thought by the readiness in the office, you had continued in it some time:
you say seven years together


And a half sir.


Alas, it has been great pains to you: they do you wrong to put you so often
upon it. Are there not men in your Ward sufficient to serve it


'Faith sir, few of any wit in such matters: as they are chosen, they are glad
to choose me for them; I do it for some piece of money, and go through with
all


Look you bring me in the names of some six or seven, the most sufficient of
your parish


To your Worships house sir?


To my house: fare you well: what is a clock, think you?


Eleven, Sir.


I pray you home to dinner with me.


I humbly thank you.


It grieves me for the death of Claudio
But there is no remedy:

Lord Angelo is severe.


It is but needful.
Mercy is not it self, that often looks so,
Pardon is still the nurse of second woe:
But yet, poor Claudio; there is no remedy.
Come Sir.

He Is hearing of a Cause; he will come straight, I Will tell him of you.


'Pray you do; I Will know
His pleasure, may be he will relent; alas
He has but as offended in a dream,
All Sects, all Ages smack of this vice, and he
To die for it?

Now, what is the matter Provost?


Is it your will Claudio shall die to morrow?


Did not I tell thee yea? had thou not order? Why do thou ask again?


Lest I might be too rash:
Under your good correction, I have seen
When after execution, Judgment has
Repented ore his doom.

Go to; let that be mine,
Do you your office, or give up your Place,
And you shall well be spared.

I crave your Honors pardon:
What shall be done Sir, with the groaning Juliet?
She Is very near her hour.

Dispose of her
To some more fitter place; and that with speed.

Here is the sister of the man condemned,
Desires access to you.

Has he a Sister?


I my good Lord, a very virtuous maid,
And to be shortly of a Sister-hood,
If not already.

Well: let her be admitted,
See you the Fornicatresse be removed,
Let her have needful, but not lavish means,
There shall be order for it.

'Saue your Honor.


Stay a little while: y' are welcome: what is your will?


I am a woeful Suitor to your Honor,
'Please but your Honor hear me.

Well: what is your suite.


There is a vice that most I do abhor,
And most desire should meet the blow of Justice;
For which I would not plead, but that I must,
For which I must not plead, but that I am
At war, twixt will, and will not.

Well: the matter?


I have a brother is condemned to die,
I do beseech you let it be his fault,
And not my brother.

Heaven give thee moving graces.


Condemn the fault, and not the actor of it,
Why every fault's condemnd ere it be done:
Mine were the very Cipher of a Function
To fine the faults, whose fine stands in record,
And let go by the Actor:

Oh just, but severe Law:
I had a brother then; heaven keep your honor.

Giue't not ore so: to him again, entreat him,
Kneel down before him, hang upon his gown,
You are too cold: if you should need a pin,
You could not with more t^me tongue desire it:
To him, I say.

Must he needs die?


Maiden, no remedy.


Yes: I do think that you might pardon him,
And neither heaven, nor man grieve at the mercy.

I will not do it.


But can you if you would?


Look what I will not, that I cannot do.


But might you do it and do the world no wrong
If so your heart were touched with that remorse,
As mine is to him?

He Is sentenced, it is too late.


You are too cold.


Too late? why no: I that do speak a word
May call it again: well, believe this
No ceremony that to great ones longs,
Not the Kings Crown; nor the deputed sword,
The Marshalls Truncheon, nor the Judges Robe
Become them with one half so good a grace
As mercy does: If he had bin as you, and you as he,
You would have slipped like him, but he like you
Would not have been so stern.

Pray you be gone.


I would to heaven I had your potencie,
And you were Isabell: should it then be thus?
No: I would tell what 'twere to be a Judge,
And what a prisoner.

I, touch him: there is the vain.


Your Brother is a forfeit of the Law,
And you but waste your words.

Alas, alas:
Why all the souls that were, were forfeit once,
And he that might the vantage best have took,
Found out the remedy: how would you be,
If he, which is the top of Judgment, should
But judge you, as you are? Oh, think on that,
And mercy then will breathe within your lips
Like man new made.

Be you content, (fair Maid)
It is the Law, not I, condemn your brother,
Were he my kinsman, brother, or my son,
It should be thus with him: he must die to morrow.

To morrow? oh, that is sudden,
Spare him, spare him:
He Is not prepared for death; even for our kitchins
We kill the foul of season: shall we serve heaven
With less respect then we do minister
To our grosse-selues? good, good my Lord, bethink you;
Who is it that has di'd for this offense?
There Is many have committed it.

I, well said.


The Law has not bin dead, though it has slept
Those many had not dared to do that evil
If the first, that did the Edict infringe
Had answered for his deed. Now it is awake.
Takes note of what is done, and like a Prophet
Looks in a glass that shows what future evils
Either now, or by remissness, new conceived,
And so in progress to be hatc'hd, and borne,
Are now to have no successiue degrees,
But here they live to end.

Yet show some pity.


I show it most of all, when I show Justice;
For then I pity those I do not know,
Which a dismis'd offense, would after gaul
And do him right, that answering one foul wrong
Lives not to act another. Be satisfied;
Your Brother dies to morrow; be content.

So you must be ye first that gives this sentence,
And he, that suffers: Oh, it is excellent
To have a Giants strength: but it is tyrannous
To use it like a Giant.

That Is well said.


Could great men thunder
As Jove himself does, Jove would never be quiet,
For every pelting petty Officer
Would use his heaven for thunder;
Nothing but thunder: Merciful heaven,
Thou rather with thy sharp and sulpherous bol^
Splits the vn-wedgable and gnarled Oak,
Then, the soft Mertill: But man, proud man,
Dressed in a little brief authority,
Most ignorant of what he is most assured,
(His glassie Essence) like an angry Ape
Plays such phantastique tricks before high heaven,
As makes the Angels weep: who with our spleenes,
Would all themselves laugh mortal.

Oh, to him, to him wench: he will relent,
He Is coming: I perceiue't.

Pray heaven she win him.


We cannot weigh our brother with our self,
Great men may jest with Saints: it is wit in them,
But in the less foul profanation.

You Are in th right (Girl) more of that.


That in the Captaine's but a chollericke word,
Which in the Soldier is flat blasphemy.

Art auis'd of that? more on it.


Why do you put these sayings upon me?


Because Authority, though it err like others,
Has yet a kind of medicine in it self
That skins the vice of th top; go to your bosom,
Knock there, and ask your heart what it does know
That Is like my brothers fault: if it confess
A natural guiltiness, such as is his,
Let it not sound a thought upon your tongue
Against my brothers life.

She speaks, and it is such sense
That my Sense breeds with it; fare you well.

Gentle my Lord, turn back.


I will bethink me: come again to morrow.


Hark, how I Will bribe you: good my Lord turn back.


How? bribe me?


I, with such gifts that heaven shall share with you.


You had marred all else.


Not with fond Sickles of the tested-gold,
Or Stones, whose rate are either rich, or poor
As fancy values them: but with true prayers,
That shall be up at heaven, and enter there
Ere Sun rise: prayers from preserved souls,
From fasting Maids, whose minds are dedicate
To nothing temporal.

Well: come to me to morrow.


Go to: it is well; away.


Heaven keep your honor safe.


Amen.
For I am that way going to temptation,
Where prayers cross.

At what hour to morrow,
Shall I attend your Lordship?

At any time 'fore-noone.


'Saue your Honor.


From thee: even from thy virtue.
What Is this? what is this? is this her fault, or mine?
The Tempter, or the Tempted, who sins most? ha?
Not she: nor does she tempt: but it is I,
That, lying by the Violet in the Sun,
Do as the Carrion does, not as the flower,
Corrupt with virtuous season: Can it be,
That Modesty may more betray our Sense
Then woman's lightness? having waste ground enough,
Shall we desire to raze the Sanctuary
And pitch our evils there? oh fie, fie, fie:
What do thou? or what art thou Angelo?
Do thou desire her fowly, for those things
That make her good? oh, let her brother live:
Thieves for their robbery have authority,
When Judges steal themselves: what, do I love her,
That I desire to hear her speak again?
And feast upon her eyes? what is it I dream on?
Oh cunning enemy, that to catch a Saint,
With Saints do bait thy hook: most dangerous
Is that temptation, that does goad us on
To sin, in loving virtue: never could the Strumpet
With all her double vigor, Art, and Nature
Once stir my temper: but this virtuous Maid
Subdues me quite: Ever till now
When men were fond, I smild, and wondered how.

Hail to you, Provost, so I think you are.


I am the Provost: what is your will, good Friar?


Bound by my charity, and my blessed order,
I come to visit the afflicted spirits
Here in the prison: do me the common right
To let me see them: and to make me know
The nature of their crimes, that I may minister
To them accordingly.

I would do more then that, if more were needful
Look here comes one: a Gentlewoman of mine,
Who falling in the flawes of her own youth,
Has blisterd her report: She is with child,
And he that got it, sentenced: a young man,
More fit to do another such offense,
Then dye for this.

When must he dye?


As I do think to morrow.
I have provided for you, stay a while
And you shall be conducted.

Repent you (fair one) of the sin you carry?


I do; and bear the shame most patiently.


I Will teach you how you shall araign your conscience
And try your penitence, if it be sound,
Or hollowly put on.

I Will gladly learn.


Love you the man that wronged you?


Yes, as I love the woman that wronged him.


So then it seems your most offense full act
Was mutually committed.

Mutually.


Then was your sin of heavier kind then his.


I do confess it, and repent it (Father.)


It Is meet so (daughter) but least you do repent
As that the sin has brought you to this shame,
Which sorrow is always toward our selves, not heaven,
Showing we would not spare heaven, as we love it,
But as we stand in fear.

I do repent me as it is an evil,
And take the shame with joy.

There rest:
Your partner (as I hear) must die to morrow,
And I am going with instruction to him:
Grace go with you, Benedicite.

Must die tomorrow? oh injurious Love
That respits me a life, whose very comfort
Is still a dying horror.

It Is pity of him.


When I would pray, and think, I think, and pray
To several subjects: heaven has my empty words,
Whilst my Invention, hearing not my Tongue,
Anchors on Isabell: heaven in my mouth,
As if I did but only chew his name,
And in my heart the strong and swelling evil
Of my conception: the state whereon I studied
Is like a good thing, being often read
Grown feared, and tedious: yea, my Gravity
Wherein (let no man hear me) I take pride,
Could I, with boot, change for an idle plume
Which the air beats for vain: oh place, oh form,
How often do thou with thy case, thy habit
Wrench awe from fools, and tie the wiser souls
To thy false seeming? Blood, thou art blood,
Let Us write good Angel on the Devils horn
It Is not the Devils Crest: how now? who is there?

One Isabell, a Sister, desires access to you,


Teach her the way: oh, heavens
Why does my blood thus muster to my heart,
Making both it unable for it self,
And dispossessing all my other parts
Of necessary fitness?
So play the foolish throngs with one that swounds,
Come all to help him, and so stop the air
By which he should revive: and even so
The general subject to a wel-wisht King
Quit their own part, and in obsequious fondness
Crowd to his presence, where their vn-taught love
Must needs appear offense: how now fair Maid.

I am come to know your pleasure.


That you might know it, would much better please me,
Then to demand what it is: your Brother cannot live.

Even so: heaven keep your Honor.


Yet may he live a while: and it may be
As long as you, or I: yet he must die.

Under your Sentence?


Yea.


When, I beseech you: that in his Reprieue
(Longer, or shorter) he may be so fitted
That his soul sicken not.

Ha? fie, these filthy vices: It were as good
To pardon him, that has from nature stolen
A man already made, as to remit
Their saucy sweetness, that do coin heavens Image
In stamps that are forbid: it is all as easy,
Falsely to take away a life true made,
As to put mettle in restrained means
To make a false one.

It Is set down so in heaven, but not in earth.


Say you so: then I shall poze you quickly.
Which had you rather, that the most just Law
Now took your brothers life, and to redeem him
Give up your body to such sweet uncleanness
As she that he has staind?

Sir, believe this.
I had rather give my body, then my soul.

I talk not of your soul: our compelled sins
Stand more for number, then for account.

How say you?


Nay I Will not warrant that: for I can speak
Against the thing I say: Answer to this,
I (now the voice of the recorded Law)
Pronounce a sentence on your Brothers life,
Might there not be a charity in sin,
To save this Brothers life?

Please you to do it,
I Will take it as a peril to my soul,
It is no sin at all, but charity.

Pleased you to do it, at peril of your soul
Were equal poize of sin, and charity.

That I do beg his life, if it be sin
Heaven let me bear it: you granting of my suit,
If that be sin, I Will make it my Morne-praier,
To have it added to the faults of mine,
And nothing of your answer.

Nay, but hear me.
Your sense pursues not mine: either you are ignorant,
Or seem so crafty; and that is not good.

Let be ignorant, and in nothing good,
But graciously to know I am no better.

Thus wisdom wishes to appear most bright,
When it does tax it self: As these black Masks
Proclaim an en-shield beauty ten times louder
Then beauty could displaied: But mark me,
To be received plain, I Will speak more gross:
Your Brother is to dye.

So.


And his offense is so, as it appears,
Accountant to the Law, upon that pain.

True.


Admit no other way to save his life
(As I subscribe not that, nor any other,
But in the less of question) that you, his Sister,
Finding your self desired of such a person,
Whose creadit with the Judge, or own great place,
Could fetch your Brother from the Manacles
Of the all-building-Law: and that there were
No earthly mean to save him, but that either
You must lay down the treasures of your body,
To this supposed, or else to let him suffer:
What would you do?

As much for my poor Brother, as my self;
That is: were I under the terms of death,
The impression of keen whips, I Would wear as Rubies,
And strip my self to death, as to a bed,
That longing have bin sick for, ere I Would yield
My body up to shame.

Then must your brother die.


And it were the cheaper way:
Better it were a brother did at once,
Then that a sister, by redeeming him
Should die for ever.

Were not you then as cruel as the Sentence,
That you have slandered so?

Ignomie in ransom, and free pardon
Are of two houses: lawful mercy,
Is nothing kin to foul redemption.

You seemed of late to make the Law a tirant,
And rather proved the sliding of your brother
A merriment, then a vice.

Oh pardon me my Lord, it often falls out
To have, what we would have,
We speak not what we mean;
I something do excuse the thing I hate,
For his advantage that I dearly love.

We are all frail.


Else let my brother die,
If not a fedarie but only he
Owe, and succeed thy weakness.

Nay, women are frail too.


I, as the glasses where they view themselves,
Which are as easy broke as they make forms:
Women? Help heaven; men their creation mar
In profiting by them: Nay, call us ten times frail,
For we are soft, as our complexions are,
And credulous to false prints.

I think it well:
And from this testimony of your own sex
(Since I suppose we are made to be no stronger
Then faults may shake our frames) let me be bold;
I do arrest your words. Be that you are,
That is a woman; if you be more, you are none.
If you be one (as you are well expressed
By all external warrants) show it now,
By putting on the destined Liuerie.

I have no tongue but one; gentle my Lord,
Let me entreat you speak the former language.

Plainly conceive I love you.


My brother did love Juliet,
And you tell me that he shall die for it.

He shall not Isabell if you give me love.


I know your virtue has a license in it,
Which seems a little fouler then it is,
To pluck on others.

Believe me on mine Honor,
My words express my purpose.

Ha? Little honor, to be much believed,
And most pernicious purpose: Seeming, seeming.
I will proclaim thee Angelo, look for it.
Sign me a present pardon for my brother,
Or with an out-stretcht throat I Will tell the world aloud
What man thou art.

Who will believe thee Isabell?
My vnsoild name, the austereness of my life,
My vouch against you, and my place in th State,
Will so your accusation ouer-weigh,
That you shall stifle in your own report,
And smell of calumny. I have begun,
And now I give my sensual race, the reine,
Fit thy consent to my sharp appetite,
Lay by all nicetie, and prolixious blushes
That banish what they sue for: Redeem thy brother,
By yielding up thy body to my will,
Or else he must not only die the death,
But thy unkindness shall his death draw out
To lingering sufferance: Answer me to morrow,
Or by the affection that now guides me most,
I Will prove a Tirant to him. As for you,
Say what you can; my false, ore-weighs your true.

To whom should I complain? Did I tell this,
Who would believe me? O perilous mouths
That bear in them, one and the selfsame tongue,
Either of condemnation, or approofe,
Bidding the Law make curtsie to their will,
Hooking both right and wrong to the appetite,
To follow as it draws. I Will to my brother,
Though he has fallen by prompture of the blood,
Yet has he in him such a mind of Honor,
That had he twenty heads to tender down
On twenty bloody blocks, hee'ld yield them up,
Before his sister should her body stoop,
To such abhord pollution.
Then Isabell live chaste, and brother die;
"More then our Brother, is our Chastity.
I Will tell him yet of Angelo's request,
And fit his mind to death, for his souls rest.

So then you hope of pardon from Lord Angelo?


The miserable have no other medicine
But only hope: IN have hope to live, and am prepared to die.

Be absolute for death: either death or life
Shall thereby be the sweeter. Reason thus with life:
If I do loose thee, I do loose a thing
That none but fools would keep: a breath thou art,
Servile to all the skyie-influences,
That do this habitation where thou keepst
Hourly afflict: Merely, thou art deaths fool,
For him thou labourst by thy flight to shun,
And yet runst toward him still. Thou art not noble,
For all the accommodations that thou bearst,
Are nursed by baseness: You Are by no means valiant,
For thou do fear the soft and tender forke
Of a poor worm: thy best of rest is sleep,
And that thou often prouoakst, yet grossly fearst
Thy death, which is no more. Thou art not thy self,
For thou exists on many a thousand grains
That issue out of dust. Happy thou art not,
For what thou have not, still thou striu'st to get,
And what thou have forgetst. Thou art not certain,
For thy complexion shifts to strange effects,
After the Moon: If thou art rich, you are poor,
For like an Ass, whose back with Ingots bows;
Thou bearst thy heavy riches but a journey,
And death vnloads thee; Friend have thou none.
For thine own bowels which do call thee, fire
The mere effusion of thy proper loins
Do curse the Gowt, Sapego, and the Rheum
For ending thee no sooner. Thou have nor youth, nor age
But as it were an after-dinners sleep
Dreaming on both, for all thy blessed youth
Becomes as aged, and does beg the alms
Of palsied-Eld: and when thou art old, and rich
Thou have neither heat, affection, limb, nor beauty
To make thy riches pleasant: what is yet in this
That bears the name of life? Yet in this life
Lie hid more thousand deaths; yet death we fear
That makes these odds, all even.

I humbly thank you.
To sue to live, I find I seek to die,
And seeking death, find life: Let it come on.

What hoa? Peace here; Grace, and good company.


Who Is there? Come in, the wish deserves a welcome.


Dear sir, ere long I Will visit you again.


Most bolie Sir; I thank you.


My business is a word or two with Claudio.


And very welcome: look Signior, here is your sister.


Provost, a word with you.


As many as you please.


Bring them to hear me speak, where I may be concealed.


Now sister, what is the comfort?


Why,
As all comforts are: most good, most good indeed,
Lord Angelo having affairs to heaven
Intends you for his swift Ambassador,
Where you shall be an everlasting Leiger;
Therefore your best appointment make with speed,
To Morrow you set on.

Is there no remedy?


None, but such remedy, as to save a head
To cleave a heart in twain:

But is there any?


Yes brother, you may live;
There is a devilish mercy in the Judge,
If you will implore it, that will free your life,
But fetter you till death.

Perpetual durance?


I just, perpetual durance, a restraint
Through all the worlds vastiditie you had
To a determined scope.

But in what nature?


In such a one, as you consenting to it,
Would bark your honor from that trunk you bear,
And leave you naked.

Let me know the point.


Oh, I do fear thee Claudio, and I quake,
Least thou a feauorous life should entertain,
And six or seven winters more respect
Then a perpetual Honor. Dare thou die?
The sense of death is most in apprehension,
And the poor Beetle that we tread upon
In corporal sufferance, finds a pang as great.
As when a Giant dies.

Why give you me this shame?
Think you I can a resolution fetch
From flowrie tenderness? If I must die,
I will encounter darkness as a bride,
And hug it in mine arms.

There spoke my brother: there my fathers grave
Did utter forth a voice. Yes, thou must die:
Thou art too noble to conserve a life
In base appliances. This outward sainted Deputy,
Whose settled visagn, and deliberate word
Nips youth in th head, and follies does ^new
As Falcon does the Foul, is yet a devil:
His filth within being cast, he would appear
A pond, as deep as hell.

The prenzie, Angelo?


Oh it is the cunning Liuerie of hell,
The damnest body to inuest, and cover
In prenzie gardes; do thou think Claudio,
If I would yield him my virginity
Thou might be freed?

Oh heavens, it cannot be.


Yes, he would giu't thee; from this rank offense
So to offend him still. This night's the time
That I should do what I abhor to name,
Or else thou die to morrow.

Thou shall not do it.


O, were it but my life,
I Would throw it down for your deliverance
As frankely as a pin.

Thanks dear Isabell.


Be ready Claudio, for your death to morrow.


Yes. Has he affections in him,
That thus can make him bite the Law by the nose,
When he would force it? Sure it is no sin,
Or of the deadly seven it is the least.

Which is the least?


If it were damnable, he being so wise,
Why would he for the momentarie trick
Be perdurablie fin'de? Oh Isabell.

What says my brother?


Death is a fearful thing.


And shamed life, a hateful.


I, but to die, and go we know not where,
To lie in cold obstruction, and to rot,
This sensible warm motion, to become
A kneaded clod; And the delighted spirit
To bath in fiery floods, or to recide
In thrilling Region of thicke-ribbed Ice,
To be imprisoned in the viewlesse winds
And blown with restless violence round about
The pendant world: or to be worse then worst
Of those, that lawless and incertaine thought,
Imagine howling, it is too horrible.
The weariest, and most loathed worldly life
That Age, Ache, perjury, and imprisonment
Can lay on nature, is a Paradise
To what we fear of death.

Alas, alas.


Sweet Sister, let me live.
What sin you do, to save a brothers life,
Nature dispenses with the deed so far,
That it becomes a virtue.

Oh you beast,
Oh faithless Coward, oh dishonest wretch,
Will thou be made a man, out of my vice?
Is It not a kind of Incest, to take life
From thine own sisters shame? What should I think,
Heaven shield my Mother played my Father fair:
For such a warped slip of wilderness
Nere issued from his blood. Take my defiance,
Die, perish: Might but my bending down
Repreeue thee from thy fate, it should proceed.
I Will pray a thousand prayers for thy death,
No word to save thee.

Nay hear me Isabell.


Oh fie, fie, fie:
Thy sinn's not accidental, but a Trade;
Mercy to thee would prove it self a Bawd,
It Is best that thou die quickly.

Oh hear me Isabella.


Vouchsafe a word, young sister, but one word.


What is your Will.


Might you dispense with your leisure, I would by and by have some speech with
you: the satisfaction I would require, is likewise your own benefit


I have no superfluous leisure, my stay must be stolen out of other affairs:
but I will attend you a while


Son, I have ouer-heard what has past between you and your sister. Angelo had
never the purpose to corrupt her; only he has made an assay of her virtue, to
practice his judgment with the disposition of natures. She (having the truth
of honor in her) has made him that gracious denial, which he is most glad to
receive: I am Confessor to Angelo, and I know this to be true, therefore prepare
your self to death: do not satisfy your resolution with hopes that are
fallible, to morrow you must die, go to your knees, and make ready


Let me ask my sister pardon, I am so out of love with life, that I will sue to
be rid of it


Hold you there: farewell: Provost, a word with you.


What Is your will (father?)


That now you are come, you will be gone: leave me a while with the Maid, my
mind promises with my habit, no loss shall touch her by my company


In good time.


The hand that has made you fair, has made you good: the goodness that is
cheap in beauty, makes beauty brief in goodness; but grace being the soul of
your complexion, shall keep the body of it ever fair: the assault that Angelo
has made to you, Fortune has conuaid to my understanding; and but that
frailty has examples for his falling, I should wonder at Angelo: how will you
do to content this Substitute, and to save your Brother


I am now going to resolve him: I had rather my brother die by the Law, then my
son should be unlawfully borne. But (oh) how much is the good Duke deceived
in Angelo: if ever he return, and I can speak to him, I will open my lips in
vain, or discover his government


That shall not be much amiss: yet, as the matter now stands, he will avoid
your accusation: he made trial of you only. Therefore fasten your ear on my
aduisings, to the love I have in doing good; a remedy presents it self. I do
make my self believe that you may most vprighteously do a poor wronged Lady a
merited benefit; redeem your brother from the angry Law; do no stain to your
own gracious person, and much please the absent Duke, if peradventure he shall
ever return to have hearing of this business


Let me hear you speak farther; I have spirit to do any thing that appears
not foul in the truth of my spirit


Virtue is bold, and goodness never fearful: Have you not heard speak of
Mariana the sister of Frederick the great Soldier, who miscarried at Sea


I have heard of the Lady, and good words went with her name.


She should this Angelo have married: was affianced to her oath, and the
nuptial appointed: between which time of the contract, and limit of the
solemnity, her brother Frederick was wrackt at Sea, having in that perished
vessel, the dowry of his sister: but mark how heavily this befell to the
poor Gentlewoman, there she lost a noble and renowned brother, in his love
toward her, ever most kind and natural: with him the portion and sinew of her
fortune, her marriage dowry: with both, her combynate-husband, this
well-seeming Angelo


Can this be so? did Angelo so leave her?


Left her in her tears, and dried not one of them with his comfort: swallowed
his vows whole, pretending in her, discoueries of dishonor: in few, bestowed
her on her own lamentation, which she yet wears for his sake: and he, a
marble to her tears, is washed with them, but relents not


What a merit were it in death to take this poor maid from the world? what
corruption in this life, that it will let this man live? But how out of this
can she avail


It is a rupture that you may easily heal: and the cure of it not only saues
your brother, but keeps you from dishonor in doing it


Show me how (good Father.)


This forenamed Maid has yet in her the continuance of her first affection:
his unjust unkindness (that in all reason should have quenched her love) has
(like an impediment in the Current) made it more violent and unruly: Go you to
Angelo, answer his requiring with a plausible obedience, agree with his
demands to the point: only refer your self to this advantage; first, that
your stay with him may not be long: that the time may have all shadow, and
silence in it: and the place answer to conuenience: this being granted in
course, and now follows all: we shall advise this wronged maid to steed up
your appointment, go in your place: if the encounter acknowledge it self
hereafter, it may compel him to her recompense; and here, by this is your
brother saved, your honor untainted, the poor Mariana aduantaged, and the
corrupt Deputy scaled. The Maid will I frame, and make fit for his attempt: if
you think well to carry this as you may, the doublenes of the benefit defends
the deceit from reproof. What think you of it


The image of it gives me content already, and I trust it will grow to a most
prosperous perfection


It lies much in your holding up: haste you speedily to Angelo, if for this
night he entreat you to his bed, give him promise of satisfaction: I will
presently to S. Lukes, there at the moated-Grange recides this dejected
Mariana; at that place call upon me, and dispatch with Angelo, that it may be
quickly


I thank you for this comfort: fare you well good father.


Nay, if there be no remedy for it, but that you will needs buy and sell men
and women like beasts, we shall have all the world drink brown and white
bastard


Oh heavens, what stuff is here.


It Was never merry world since of two vsuries the merriest was put down, and
the worser allowed by order of Law; a fur'd gown to keep him warm; and furd
with Fox and Lamb-skins too, to signify, that craft being richer then
Innocence, stands for the facing


Come your way sir: bless you good Father Friar.


And you good Brother Father; what offense has this man made you, Sir?


Marry Sir, he has offended the Law; and Sir, we take him to be a Thief too
Sir: for we have found upon him Sir, a strange Pick-lock, which we have sent
to the Deputy


Fie, sirrah, a Bawd, a wicked bawd,
The evil that thou causest to be done,
That is thy means to live. Do thou but think
What it is to cram a maw, or cloth a back
From such a filthy vice: say to thy self,
From their abominable and beastly touches
I drink, I eat away my self, and live:
Can thou believe thy living is a life,
So stinkingly depending? Go mend, go mend.

Indeed, it does stink in some sort, Sir:
But yet Sir I would prove.

Nay, if the devil have given thee proofs for sin
Thou will prove his. Take him to prison Officer:
Correction, and Instruction must both work
Ere this rude beast will profit.

He must before the Deputy Sir, he has given him warning: the Deputy cannot
abide a Whore-master: if he be a Whore-monger, and comes before him, he were as
good go a mile on his errand


That we were all, as some would seem to be
From our faults, as faults from seeming free.

His neck will come to your wast, a Cord sir.


I spy comfort, I cry bail: Here Is a Gentleman, and a friend of mine.


How now noble Pompey? What, at the wheels of Caesar? Art thou led in triumph?
What is there none of Pigmalions Images newly made woman to be had now, for
putting the hand in the pocket, and extracting clutch'd? What reply? Ha? What
say thou to this Tune, Matter, and Method? Is It not drowned in th last rain?
Ha? What say thou Trot? Is the world as it was Man? Which is the way? Is it
sad, and few words? Or how? The trick of it


Still thus, and thus: still worse?


How does my dear Morsel, thy Mistress? Procures she still? Ha?


Troth sir, she has eaten up all her beef, and she is her self in the tub.


Why it is good: It is the right of it: it must be so. Ever your fresh Whore;
and your powdered Baud, an vnshun'd consequence, it must be so. Art going to
prison Pompey


Yes faith sir.


Why it is not amiss Pompey: farewell: go say I sent thee thither: for debt
Pompey? Or how


For being a baud; for being a baud.


Well, then imprison him: If imprisonment be the due of a baud, why it is his
right* Baud is he doubtless, and of antiquity too. Baud borne. Farewell good
Pompey: Commend me to the prison Pompey, you will turn good husband now
Pompey, you will keep the house


I hope Sir, your good Worship will be my bail?


No indeed vvil I not Pompey, it is not the wear: I will pray (Pompey) to
increase your bondage if you take it not patiently: Why, your mettle is the
more: Adieu trusty Pompey. Bless you Friar


And you.


Does Bridge^ paint still, Pompey? Ha?


Come your ways sir, come.


You will not bail me then Sir?


Then Pompey, nor now: what news abroad Friar? What news?


Come your ways sir, come.


Go to kennell (Pompey) go:
What news Friar of the Duke?

I know none: can you tell me of any?


Some say he is with the Emperor of Russia: other some, he is in Rome: but
where is he think you


I know not where: but wheresoever, I wish him well.


It was a mad fantastical trick of him to steal from the State, and usurp
the beggerie he was never borne to: Lord Angelo Dukes it well in his absence:
he puts transgression to it


He does well in it.


A little more lenity to Lechery would do no harm in him: Something too
crabbed that way, Friar


It is too general a vice, and severity must cure it.


Yes in good sooth, the vice is of a great kindred; it is well allied, but it
is impossible to extirpe it quite, Friar, till eating and drinking be put
down. They say this Angelo was not made by Man and Woman, after this
downright way of Creation: is it true, think you


How should he be made then?


Some report, a Sea-maid spawned him. Some, that he was begot between two
Stock-fishes. But it is certain, that when he makes water, his Urine is
congealed ice, that I know to be true: and he is a motion generatiue, that is
infallible


You are pleasant sir, and speak apace.


Why, what a ruthlesse thing is this in him, for the rebellion of a Cod-peece,
to take away the life of a man? Would the Duke that is absent have done this?
Ere he would have hanged a man for the getting a hundred Bastards, he would
have paid for the Nursing a thousand. He had some feeling of the sport; he
knew the service, and that instructed him to mercy


I never heard the absent Duke much detected for Women, he was not inclined
that way


Oh Sir, you are deceived.


It Is not possible.


Who, not the Duke? Yes, your beggar of fifty: and his use was, to put a ducket
in her Clack-dish; the Duke had Crochets in him. He would be drunk too, that
let me inform you


You do him wrong, surely.


Sir, I was an inward of his: a shie fellow was the Duke, and I believe I
know the cause of his vvithdrawing


What (I prithee) might be the cause?


No, pardon: It Is a secret must be look within the teeth and the lips: but
this I can let you understand, the greater file of the subject held the Duke to
be wise


Wise? Why no question but he was.


A very superficial, ignorant, vnweighing fellow


Either this is Envy in you, Folly, or mistaking: The very stream of his
life, and the business he has helmed, must upon a warranted need, give him
a better proclamation. Let him be but testimonied in his own bringings forth,
and he shall appear to the envious, a Scholar, a Statesman, and a Soldier:
therefore you speak unskillfully: or, if your knowledge be more, it is much
darkened in your malice


Sir, I know him, and I love him.


Love talks with better knowledge, and knowledge with dear love.


Come Sir, I know what I know.


I can hardly believe that, since you know not what you speak. But if ever the
Duke return (as our prayers are he may) let me desire you to make your answer
before him: if it be honest you have spoke, you have courage to maintain it;
I am bound to call upon you, and I pray you your name


Sir my name is Lucio, well known to the Duke.


He shall know you better Sir, if I may live to report you.


I fear you not.


O, you hope the Duke will return no more: or you imagine me to unhurtful an
opposite: but indeed I can do you little harm: You Will for-sweare this again


I Will be hanged first: Thou art deceived in me Friar. But no more of this:
Can thou tell if Claudio die to morrow, or no


Why should he die Sir?


Why? For filling a bottle with a Tunne-dish: I would the Duke we talk of were
returned again: this vngenitur'd Agent will vn-people the Province with
Continency. Sparrowes must not build in his houseeeues, because they are
lecherous: The Duke yet would have dark deeds darkly answered, he would
never bring them to light: would he were returned. Marry this Claudio is
condemned for vntrussing. Farewell good Friar, I prithee pray for me: The Duke
(I say to thee again) would eat Mutton on Fridaies. He Is now past it, yet
(and I say to thee) he would mouth with a beggar, though she smelt
browne-bread and Garlic: say that I said so: Farewell


No might, nor greatness in mortality
Can censure escape: Back-wounding calumny
The whitest virtue strikes. What King so strong,
Can tie the gall up in the slanderous tongue?
But who comes here?

Go, away with her to prison.


Good my Lord be good to me, your Honor is accounted a merciful man: good my
Lord


Double, and trebble admonition, and still forfeite in the same kind? This
would make mercy swear and play the Tirant


A Bawd of eleven years continuance, may it please your Honor.


My Lord, this is one Lucio's information against me, Mistress Kate Keepe-downe
was with child by him in the Dukes time, he promised her marriage: his Child
is a year and a quarter old come Philip and Jacob: I have kept it my self;
and see how he goes about to abuse me


That fellow is a fellow of much License: Let him be called before us. Away
with her to prison: Go too, no more words. Provost, my Brother Angelo will not
be altered, Claudio must die to morrow: Let him be furnished with Divines, and
have all charitable preparation. If my brother wrought by my pity, it should
not be so with him


So please you, this Friar has been with him, and advised him for the
entertainment of death


Good'euen, good Father.


Bliss, and goodness on you.


Of whence are you?


Not of this Country, though my chance is now
To use it for my time: I am a brother
Of gracious Order, late come from the Sea,
In special business from his Holiness.

What news abroad in th World?


None, but that there is so great a Feauor on goodness, that the dissolution
of it must cure it. Novelty is only in request, and as it is as dangerous to
be aged in any kind of course, as it is virtuous to be constant in any
undertaking. There is scarce truth enough alive to make Societies secure, but
Security enough to make Fellowships accursed: Much upon this riddle runs the
wisdom of the world: This news is old enough, yet it is every days news.
I pray you Sir, of what disposition was the Duke


One, that above all other strifes,
Contended especially to know himself.

What pleasure was he given to?


Rather rejoicing to see another merry, then merrrie at any thing which
professed to make him rejoice. A Gentleman of all temperance. But leave we him
to his events, with a prayer they may prove prosperous, and let me desire to
know, how you find Claudio prepared? I am made to understand, that you have
lent him visitation


He professes to have received no sinister measure from his Judge, but most
willingly humbles himself to the determination of Justice: yet had he framed
to himself (by the instruction of his frailty) many deceyuing promises of
life, which I (by my good leisure) have discredited to him, and now is he
resolved to die


You have paid the heavens your Function, and the prisoner the very debt of
your Calling. I have labored for the poor Gentleman, to the extremest shore
of my modesty, but my brother-Iustice have I found so severe, that he has
forced me to tell him, he is indeed Justice


If his own life,
Answer the straitness of his proceeding,
It shall become him well: wherein if he chance to fail he has sentenced
himself

I am going to visit the prisoner, Fare you well.


Peace be with you.
He who the sword of Heaven will bear,
Should be as holy, as seueare:
Pattern in himself to know,
Grace to stand, and Virtue go:
More, nor less to others paying,
Then by selfe-offences weighing.
Shame to him, whose cruel striking,
Kills for faults of his own liking:
Twice trebble shame on Angelo,
To vveede my vice, and let his grow.
Oh, what may Man within him hide,
Though Angel on the outward side?
How may likeness made in crimes,
Making practice on the Times,
To draw with idle Spiders strings
Most ponderous and substantial things?
Craft against vice, I must apply.
With Angelo to night shall lie
His old betroathed (but despised:)
So disguise shall by the disguised
Pay with falsehood, falfe exacting,
And perform an old contracting.

Take, oh take those lips away, that so sweetly were for sworn,
And those eyes: the break of day lights that do mislead the Morn;
But my kisses bring again, bring again,
Seals of love, but sealed in vain, sealed in vain.

Break off thy song, and haste thee quick away,
Here comes a man of comfort, whose advice
Has often stilled my brawling discontent.
I cry you mercy, Sir, and well could wish
You had not found me here so musical.
Let me excuse me, and believe me so,
My mirth it much displeased, but pleased my woe.

It Is good; though Music often has such a charm
To make bad, good; and good prouoake to harm.
I pray you tell me, has any body inquired for me here to day; much upon this
time have I promised here to meet


You have not bin inquired after: I have sat here all day.


I do constantly believe you: the time is come even now. I shall crave your
forbearance a little, may be I will call upon you anon for some advantage to
your self


I am always bound to you.


Very well met, and well come:
What is the news from this good Deputy?

He has a Garden circummur'd with Brick,
Whose western side is with a Vineyard backed;
And to that Vineyard is a planched gate,
That makes his opening with this bigger Key:
This other does command a little door,
Which from the Vineyard to the Garden leads,
There have I made my promise, upon the
Heavy middle of the night, to call upon him.

But shall you on your knowledge find this way?


I have t'ane a due, and wary note upon it,
With whispering, and most guilty diligence,
In action all of precept, he did show me
The way twice ore.

Are there no other tokens
Between you 'greed, concerning her observance?

No: none but only a repair in the dark,
And that I have possessed him, my most stay
Can be but brief: for I have made him know,
I have a Servant comes with me along
That stays upon me; whose persuasion is,
I come about my Brother.

It Is well borne up.
I have not yet made known to Mariana
A word of this: what hoa, within; come forth,
I pray you be acquainted with this Maid,
She comes to do you good.

I do desire the like.


Do you persuade your self that I respect you?


Good Friar, I know you do, and have found it.


Take then this your companion by the hand
Who has a story ready for your ear:
I shall attend your leisure, but make haste
The vaporous night approaches.

Wilt please you walk aside.


Oh Place, and greatness: millions of false eyes
Are stuck upon thee: volumes of report
Run with these false, and most contrarious Quest
Upon thy doings: thousand escapes of wit
Make thee the father of their idle dream,
And rack thee in their fancies. Welcome, how agreed?

She Will take the enterprise upon her father,
If you advise it.

It is not my consent,
But my entreaty too.

Little have you to say
When you depart from him, but soft and low,
Remember now my brother.

Fear me not.


Nor gentle daughter, fear you not at all:
He is your husband on a pre-contract:
To bring you thus together it is no sin,
Since that the Justice of your title to him
Does flourish the deceit. Come, let us go,
Our Corne's to reap, for yet our Tithes to sow.

Come hither sirrah; can you cut off a man's head?


If the man be a Bachelor Sir, I can:
But is he be a married man, he is his wives head,
And I can never cut off a woman's head.

Come sir, leave me your snatches, and yield me a direct answer. To morrow
morning are to die Claudio and Barnardine: here is in our prison a common
executioner, who in his office lacks a helper, if you will take it on you to
assist him, it shall redeem you from your Gyues: if not, you shall have your
full time of imprisonment, and your deliverance with an vnpittied whipping; for
you have been a notorious bawd


Sir, I have been an unlawful bawd, time out of mind, but yet I will be
content to be a lawful hangman: I would be glad to receive some instruction
from my fellow partner


What hoa, Abhorson: where is Abhorson there?


Do you call sir?


Sirrah, here is a fellow will help you to morrow in your execution: if you
think it meet, compound with him by the year, and let him abide here with
you, if not, use him for the present, and dismiss him, he cannot plead his
estimation with you: he has been a Bawd


A Bawd Sir? fie upon him, he will discredit our mystery.


Go too Sir, you weigh equally: a feather will turn the Scale.


Pray sir, by your good favor: for surely sir, a good favor you have, but that
you have a hanging look: Do you call sir, your occupation a Mystery


I Sir, a Mystery.


Painting Sir, I have heard say, is a Mystery; and your Whores sir, being
members of my occupation, using painting, do prove my Occupation, a Mystery:
but what Mystery there should be in hanging, if I should be hanged, I cannot
imagine


Sir, it is a Mystery.


Proof.


Every true man's apparel fits your Thief.


If it be too little for your thief, your true man thinks it big enough. If
it be too big for your Thief, your Thief thinks it little enough: So
every true man's apparel fits your Thief


Are you agreed?


Sir, I will serve him: For I do find your Hangman is a more penitent Trade
then your Bawd: he does oftener ask forgiveness


You sirrah, provide your block and your Axe to morrow, four a clock.


Come on (Bawd) I will instruct thee in my Trade: follow.


I do desire to learn sir: and I hope, if you have occasion to use me for your
own turn, you shall find me y' are. For truly sir, for your kindness, I owe
you a good turn


Call hither Barnardine and Claudio:
The one has my pity; not a jot the other,
Being a Murderer, though he were my brother.
Look, here is the Warrant Claudio, for thy death,
It Is now dead midnight, and by eight to morrow
Thou must be made immortal. Where Is Barnardine?

As fast locked up in sleep, as guiltless labor,
When it lies starkely in the Travelers bones,
He will not wake.

Who can do good on him?
Well, go, prepare your self. But hark, what noise?
Heaven give your spirits comfort: by, and by,
I hope it is some pardon, or repreeue
For the most gentle Claudio. Welcome Father.

The best, and wholsomst spirits of the night,
Inuellop you, good Provost: who called here of late?

None since the Curphew rung.


Not Isabell?


No.


They will then er't be long.


What comfort is for Claudio?


There Is some in hope.


It is a bitter Deputy.


Not so, not so: his life is paralel'd
Even with the stroke and line of his great Justice:
He does with holy abstinence subdue
That in himself, which he spurs on his power
To qualify in others: were he meal'd with that
Which he corrects, then were he tirrannous,
But this being so, he is just. Now are they come.
This is a gentle Provost, sildome when
The steeled Jailer is the friend of men:
How now? what noise? That spirit's possessed with have,
That wounds the vnsisting Posterne with these strokes.

There he must stay until the Officer
Arise to let him in: he is called up.

Have you no countermand for Claudio yet?
But he must die to morrow?

None Sir, none.


As here the dawning Provost, as it is,
You shall hear more ere Morning.

Happily
You something know: yet I believe there comes
No countermand: no such example have we:
Besides, upon the very siege of Justice,
Lord Angelo has to the public ear
Professed the contrary.

This is his Lords man.


And here comes Claudio's pardon.


My Lord has sent you this note,
And by me this further charge;
That you swerue not from the smallest Article of it,
Neither in time, matter, or other circumstance.
Good morrow: for as I take it, it is almost day.

I shall obey him.


This is his Pardon purchased by such sin,
For which the Pardoner himself is in:
Hence has offense his quick celeritie,
When it is borne in high Authority.
When Vice makes Mercy; Mercie's so extended,
That for the faults love, is the offender friended.
Now Sir, what news?

I told you:
Lord Angelo (be-like) thinking me remiss
In mine Office, awakens me
With this unwonted putting on, methinks strangely:
For he has not used it before.

Pray you let us hear.

Whatsoever you may hear to the contrary, let Claudio be executed by four of
the clock, and in the afternoon Bernardine: For my better satisfaction, let
me have Claudios head sent me by five. Let this be duly performed with a
thought that more depends on it, then we must yet deliver. Thus fail not to
do your Office, as you will answer it at your peril

What say you to this Sir?


What is that Barnardine, who is to be executed in the afternoon?


A Bohemian borne: But here nursed up and bred,
One that is a prisoner nine years old.

How came it, that the absent Duke had not either delivered him to his
liberty, or executed him? I have heard it was ever his manner to do so


His friends still wrought Repreeues for him: And indeed his fact till now in
the government of Lord Angelo, came not to an undoubtful proof


It is now apparent?


Most manifest, and not denied by himself.


Has he borne himself penitently in prison?
How seems he to be touched?

A man that apprehends death no more dreadfully, but as a drunken sleep,
careless, wreaklesse, and fearelesse of what is past, present, or to come:
insensible of mortality, and desperately mortal


He wants advice.


He will hear none: he has evermore had the liberty of the prison: give him
leave to escape hence, he would not. Drunk many times a day, if not many
days entirely drunk. We have very often awaked him, as if to carry him to
execution, and showed him a seeming warrant for it, it has not moved him at
all


More of him anon: There is written in your brow Provost, honesty and
constancy; if I read it not truly, my ancient skill beguiles me: but in the
boldness of my cunning, I will lay my self in hazard: Claudio, whom here you
have warrant to execute, is no greater forfeit to the Law, then Angelo who has
sentenced him. To make you understand this in a manifested effect, I crave but
four days respit: for the which, you are to do me both a present, and a
dangerous courtesy


Pray Sir, in what?


In the delaying death.


Alack, how may I do it? Having the hour limited, and an express command,
under penalty, to deliver his head in the view of Angelo? I may make my case
as Claudio's, to cross this in the smallest


By the vow of mine Order, I warrant you,
If my instructions may be your guide,
Let this Barnardine be this morning executed,
And his head borne to Angelo.

Angelo has seen them both,
And will discover the favor.

Oh, death's a great disguiser, and you may add to it; Shave the head, and tie
the beard, and say it was the desire of the penitent to be so bar'de before his
death: you know the course is common. If any thing fall to you upon this, more
then thanks and good fortune, by the Saint whom I profess, I will plead
against it with my life


Pardon me, good Father, it is against my oath.


Were you sworn to the Duke, or to the Deputy?


To him, and to his Substitutes.


You will think you have made no offense, if the Duke avouch the justice of
your dealing


But what likelihood is in that?


Not a resemblance, but a certainty; yet since I see you fearful, that neither
my coat, integrity, nor persuasion, can with ease attempt you, I will go
further then I meant, to pluck all fears out of you. Look you Sir, here is
the hand and Seal of the Duke: you know the Charracter I doubt not, and the
Signet is not strange to you


I know them both.


The Contents of this, is the return of the Duke; you shall anon ouer-reade it
at your pleasure: where you shall find within these two days, he will be
here. This is a thing that Angelo knows not, for he this very day receives
letters of strange tenor, perchance of the Dukes death, perchance entering into
some Monastery, but by chance nothing of what is writ. Look, the unfolding
Star calls up the Shepherd; put not your self into amazement, how these
things should be; all difficulties are but easy when they are known. Call
your executioner, and off with Barnardines head: I will give him a present
shrift, and advise him for a better place. Yet you are amazed, but this shall
absolutely resolve you: Come away, it is almost clear dawne


I am as well acquainted here, as I was in our house of profession: one would
think it were Mistress Ouer-dons own house, for here be many of her old
Customers. First, here is young Mr Rash, he is in for a commodity of brown
paper, and old Ginger, nine score and seventeen pounds, of which he made
five Marks ready money: marry then, Ginger was not much in request, for the
old Women were all dead. Then is there here one Mr Caper, at the suite of
Master Three-Pile the Mercer, for some four suites of Peach-colour'd Satin,
which now peaches him a beggar. Then have we here, young Dizie, and young Mr
Deepe-vow, and Mr Copperspurre, and Mr Starue-Lackey the Rapier and dagger man,
and young Drop-heire that killed lusty Pudding, and Mr Forthlight the Tilter, and
brave Mr Shootie the great Traveler, and wild Halfe-Canne that stabbed Pots,
and I think forty more, all great doers in our Trade, and are now for the
Lords sake


Sirrah, bring Barnardine hither.


Mr Barnardine, you must rise and be hanged, Mr Barnardine.


What hoa Barnardine.


A pox of your throats: who makes that noise there? What are you?


Your friends Sir, the Hangman:
You must be so good Sir to rise, and be put to death.

Away you Rogue, away, I am sleepie.


Tell him he must awake,
And that quickly too.

Pray Master Barnardine, awake till you are executed, and sleep afterward.


Go in to him, and fetch him out.


He is coming Sir, he is coming: I hear his Straw russle.


Is the Axe upon the block, sirrah?


Very ready Sir.


How now Abhorson?
What Is the news with you?

Truly Sir, I would desire you to clap into your prayers: for look you, the
Warrants come


You Rogue, I have bin drinking all night,
I am not fitted for it.

Oh, the better Sir: for he that drinks all night, and is hanged betimes in
the morning, may sleep the sounder all the next day


Look you Sir, here comes your ghostly Father: do we jest now think you?


Sir, induced by my charity, and hearing how hastily you are to depart, I am
come to advise you, Comfort you, and pray with you


Friar, not I: I have bin drinking hard all night, and I will have more time to
prepare me, or they shall beat out my brains with billets: I will not consent
to die this day, that is certain


Oh sir, you must: and therefore I beseech you
Look forward on the journey you shall go.

I swear I will not die to day for any man's persuasion.


But hear you:


Not a word: if you have any thing to say to me, come to my Ward: for thence
will not I to day


Unfit to live, or die: oh gravel heart.
After him (Fellows) bring him to the block.

Now Sir, how do you find the prisoner?


A creature vnpre-par'd, unmeet for death,
And to transport him in the mind he is,
Were damnable.

Here in the prison, Father,
There died this morning of a cruel Feauor,
One Ragozine, a most notorious Pirate,
A man of Claudio's years: his beard, and head
Just of his color. What if we do omit
This Reprobate, til he were well inclined,
And satisfy the Deputy with the visage
Of Ragozine, more like to Claudio?

Oh, it is an accident that heaven prouides:
Dispatch it presently, the hour draws on
Prefixed by Angelo: See this be done,
And sent according to command, whiles I
Persuade this rude wretch willingly to die.

This shall be done (good Father) presently:
But Barnardine must die this afternoon,
And how shall we continue Claudio,
To save me from the danger that might come,
If he were known alive?

Let this be done,
Put them in secret holds, both Barnardine and Claudio,
Ere twice the Sun has made his iournall greeting
To yond generation, you shall find
Your safety manifested.

I am your free dependant.


Quick, dispatch, and send the head to Angelo
Now will I write Letters to Angelo.
(The Provost he shall bear them) whose contents
Shall witness to him I am near at home:
And that by great Injunctions I am bound
To enter publicly: him I Will desire
To meet me at the consecrated Fount,
A League below, the City: and from thence,
By cold gradation, and weale-ballanc'd form.
We shall proceed with Angelo.

Here is the head, I Will carry it my self.


Convenient is it: Make a swift return,
For I would commune with you of such things,
That want no ear but yours.

I Will make all speed.


Peace hoa, be here.


The tongue of Isabell. She Is come to know,
If yet her brothers pardon be come hither:
But I will keep her ignorant of her good,
To make her heavenly comforts of despair,
When it is least expected.

Hoa, by your leave.


Good morning to you, fair, and gracious daughter.


The better given me by so holy a man,
Has yet the Deputy sent my brothers pardon?

He has releasd him, Isabell, from the world,
His head is off, and sent to Angelo.

Nay, but it is not so.


It is no other,
Show your wisdom daughter in your close patience.

Oh, I will to him, and pluck out his eyes.


You shall not be admitted to his sight.


Unhappy Claudio, wretched Isabell,
Injurious world, most damned Angelo.

This nor hurts him, nor profits you a lot,
Forbear it therefore, give your cause to heaven,
Mark what I say, which you shall find
By every syllable a faithful verity.
The Duke comes home to morrow: nay, dry your eyes,
One of our Covent, and his Confessor
Gives me this instance: Already he has carried
Notice to Escalus and Angelo,
Who do prepare to meet him at the gates,
There to give up their power: If you can pace your wisdom,
In that good path that I would wish it go,
And you shall have your bosom on this wretch,
Grace of the Duke, reuenges to your heart,
And general Honor.

I am directed by you.


This Letter then to Friar Peter give,
It Is that he sent me of the Dukes return:
Say, by this token, I desire his company
At Mariana's house to night. Her cause, and yours
I Will perfect him withal, and he shall bring you
Before the Duke; and to the head of Angelo
Accuse him home and home. For my poor self,
I am combined by a sacred Vow,
And shall be absent. Wend you with this Letter:
Command these fretting waters from your eyes
With a light heart; trust not my holy Order
If I pervert your course: whose here?

Good 'euen;
Friar, where is the Provost?

Not within Sir.


Oh pretty Isabella, I am pale at mine heart, to see thine eyes so red: thou
must be patient; I am feign to dine and sup with water and bran: I dare not for
my head fill my belly. One fruitful Meal would set me to it: but they say the
Duke will be here to Morrow. By my troth Isabell I loved thy brother, if the
old fantastical Duke of dark corners had been at home, he had lived


Sir, the Duke is marvelous little beholding to your reports, but the best is,
he lives not in them


Friar, thou know not the Duke so well as I do: he is a better woodman then
thou take him for


Well: you will answer this one day. Fare ye well.


Nay tarry, I Will go along with thee,
I can tell thee pretty tales of the Duke.

You have told me too many of him already sir if they be true: if not true,
none were enough


I was once before him for getting a Wench with child.


Did you such a thing?


Yes marry did I; but I was feign to forswear it,
They would else have married me to the rotten Medler.

Sir your company is fairer then honest, rest you well.


By my troth I Will go with thee to the lanes end: if baudy talk offend you,
we'el have very little of it: nay Friar, I am a kind of Burre, I shall stick


Every Letter he has writ, has disuouch'd other.


In most uneven and distracted manner, his actions show much like to madness,
pray heaven his wisdom be not tainted: and why meet him at the gates and
reliuer our authorities there


I guess not.


And why should we proclaim it in an hour before his entering, that if any
crave redress of injustice, they should exhibit their petitions in the street


He shows his reason for that: to have a dispatch of Complaints, and to
deliver us from devices hereafter, which shall then have no power to stand
against us


Well: I beseech you let it be proclaimed betimes in the morn, I Will call you
at your house: give notice to such men of sort and suite as are to meet him


I shall sir: fare you well.


Good night.
This deed vnshapes me quite, makes me vnpregnant
And dull to all proceedings. A deflowred maid,
And by an eminent body, that enforced
The Law against it? But that her tender shame
Will not proclaim against her maiden loss,
How might she tongue me? yet reason dares her no,
For my Authority bears of a credent bulk,
That no particular scandal once can touch
But it confounds the breather. He should have lived,
Save that his riotous youth with dangerous sense
Might in the times to come have taken revenge
By so receiving a dishonored life
With ransom of such shame: would yet he had lived.
Alack, when once our grace we have forgot,
Nothing goes right, we would, and we would not.

These Letters at fit time deliver me,
The Provost knows our purpose and our plot,
The matter being a foot, keep your instruction
And hold you ever to our special drift,
Though sometimes you do blench from this to that
As cause does minister: Go call at Flauia's house,
And tell him where I stay: give the like notice
To Valencius, Rowland, and to Crassus,
And bid them bring the Trumpets to the gate:
But send me Flauius first.

It shall be speeded well.


I thank thee Varrius, thou have made good have,
Come, we will walk* There Is other of our friends
Will greet us here anon: my gentle Varrius.

To speak so in directly I am loath,
I would say the truth; but to accuse him so
That is your part, ye I ^m advised to do it,
He says, to veil full purpose.

Be ruled by him.


Besides he tells me, that if peradventure
He speak against me on the adverse side,
I should not think it strange, for it is a physic
That Is bitter, to sweet end.

I would Friar Peter


Oh peace, the Friar is come.


Come I have found you out a stand most fit,
Where you may have such vantage on the Duke
He shall not pass you:
Twice have the Trumpets sounded.
The generous, and grauest Citizens
Have hent the gates, and very near upon
The Duke is entering:
Therefore hence away.

My very worthy Cosen, fairly met,
Our old, and faithful friend, we are glad to see you.

Happy return be to your royal grace.


Many and hearty thankings to you both:
We have made enquiry of you, and we hear
Such goodness of your Justice, that our soul
Cannot but yield you forth to public thanks
Forerunning more requital.

You make my bonds still greater.


Oh your desert speaks loud, and I should wrong it
To lock it in the wards of covert bosom
When it deserves with characters of brass
A forted residence against the tooth of time,
And razure of oblivion: Give we your hand
And let the Subject see, to make them know
That outward courtesies would feign proclaim
Favors that keep within: Come Escalus,
You must walk by us, on our other hand:
And good supporters are you.

Now is your time
Speak loud, and kneel before him.

Justice, O royal Duke, veil your regard
Upon a wronged (I would feign have said a Maid)
Oh worthy Prince, dishonor not your eye
By throwing it on any other object,
Till you have heard me, in my true complaint,
And given me Justice, Justice, Justice, Justice.

Relate your wrongs;
In what, by whom? be brief:
Here is Lord Angelo shall give you Justice,
Reveal your self to him.

Oh worthy Duke,
You bid me seek redemption of the devil,
Hear me your self: for that which I must speak
Must either punish me, not being believed,
Or wring redress from you:
Hear me: oh hear me, here.

My Lord, her wits I fear me are not firm:
She has bin a suitor to me, for her Brother
Cut off by course of Justice.

By course of Justice.


And she will speak most bitterly, and strange.


Most strange: but yet most truly will I speak,
That Angelo's forsworn, is it not strange?
That Angelo's a murderer, is it not strange?
That Angelo is an adulterous thief,
An hypocrite, a virgin violator,
Is it not strange? and strange?

Nay it is ten times strange?


It is not truer he is Angelo,
Then this is all as true, as it is strange;
Nay, it is ten times true, for truth is truth
To the end of reckning.

Away with her: poor soul
She speaks this, in the infirmity of sense.

Oh Prince, I conjure thee, as thou beleeu'st
There is another comfort, then this world,
That thou neglect me not, with that opinion
That I am touched with madness: make not impossible
That which but seems unlike, it is not impossible
But one, the wickedst caitiffe on the ground
May seem as shie, as grave, as just, as absolute:
As Angelo, even so may Angelo
In all his dressings, caracts, titles, forms,
Be an arch-villaine: Believe it, royal Prince
If he be less, he is nothing, but he is more,
Had I more name for badnesse.

By mine honesty
If she be mad, as I believe no other,
Her madness has the oddest frame of sense,
Such a dependancy of thing, on thing,
As ere I heard in madness.

Oh gracious Duke
Harp not on that; nor do not banish reason
For inequality, but let your reason serve
To make the truth appear, where it seems hid,
And hide the false seems true.

Many that are not mad
Have sure more lack of reason:
What would you say?

I am the Sister of one Claudio,
Condemnd upon the Act of Fornication
To loose his head, condemned by Angelo,
I, (in probation of a Sisterhood)
Was sent to by my Brother; one Lucio
As then the Messenger.

That Is I, and't like your Grace:
I came to her from Claudio, and desired her,
To try her gracious fortune with Lord Angelo,
For her poor Brothers pardon.

That Is he indeed.


You were not bid to speak.


No, my good Lord,
Nor wished to hold my peace.

I wish you now then,
Pray you take note of it: and when you have
A business for your self: pray heaven you then
Be perfect.

I warrant your honor.


The warrant's for your self: take heed to it.


This Gentleman told somewhat of my Tale.


Right.


It may be right, but you are in the wrong
To speak before your time: proceed,

I went
To this pernicious Caitiffe Deputy.

That Is somewhat madly spoken.


Pardon it,
The phrase is to the matter.

Mended again: the matter: proceed.


In brief, to set the needless process by:
How I persuaded, how I praid, and kneeled,
How he refeld me, and how I replide
(For this was of much length) the vild conclusion
I now begin with grief, and shame to utter.
He would not, but by gift of my chaste body
To his concupiscible intemperate lust
Release my brother; and after much debatement,
My sisterly remorse, confutes mine honor,
And I did yield to him: But the next morn betimes,
His purpose surfeiting, he sends a warrant
For my poor brothers head.

This is most likely.


Oh that it were as like as it is true.


By heaven (fond wretch) you know not what thou speak,
Or else thou art suborned against his honor
In hateful practice: first his Integrity
Stands without blemish: next it imports no reason,
That with such vehemence he should pursue
Faults proper to himself: if he had so offended
He would have waigh'd thy brother by himself,
And not have cut him off: some one has set you on:
Confess the truth, and say by whose advice
Thou came here to complain.

And is this all?
Then oh you blessed Ministers above
Keep me in patience, and with ripened time
Unfold the evil, which is here wrapped up
In countenance: heaven shield your Grace from woe,
As I thus wronged, hence vnbeleeued go.

I know you would feign be gone: An Officer:
To prison with her: Shall we thus permit
A blasting and a scandalous breath to fall,
On him so near us? This needs must be a practice;
Who knew of your intent and coming hither?

One that I would were here, Friar Lodowick.


A ghostly Father, belike:
Who knows that Lodowicke?

My Lord, I know him, it is a meddling Friar,
I do not like the man: had he been Lay my Lord,
For certain words he spoke against your Grace
In your retirment, I had swing'd him soundly.

Words against me? this 'a good Friar belike
And to set on this wretched woman here
Against our Substitute: Let this Friar be found.

But yesternight my Lord, she and that Friar
I saw them at the prison: a saucy Friar,
A very scuruy fellow.

Blessed be your Royal Grace:
I have stood by my Lord, and I have heard
Your royal ear abused: first has this woman
Most wrongfully accused your Substitute,
Who is as free from touch, or soil with her
As she from one vngot.

We did believe no less.
Know you that Friar Lodowick that she speaks of?

I know him for a man divine and holy,
Not scuruy, nor a temporary medler
As he is reported by this Gentleman:
And on my trust, a man that never yet
Did (as he vouches) mis-report your Grace.

My Lord, most villanously, believe it.


Well: he in time may come to clear himself;
But at this instant he is sick, my Lord:
Of a strange Feauor; upon his mere request
Being come to knowledge, that there was complaint
Intended against Lord Angelo, came I hither
To speak as from his mouth, what he does know
Is true, and false: And what he with his oath
And all probation will make up full clear
When soever he is conuented: First for this woman,
To justify this worthy Noble man
So vulgarly and personally accused,
Her shall you hear disproued to her eyes,
Till she her self confess it.

Good Friar, let us hear it:
Do you not smile at this, Lord Angelo?
Oh heaven, the vanity of wretched fools.
Give us some seats, Come cosen Angelo,
In this I Will be impartial: be you Judge
Of your own Cause: Is this the Witness Friar?
First, let her show your face, and after, speak.

Pardon my Lord, I will not show my face
Until my husband bid me.

What, are you married?


No my Lord.


Are you a Maid?


No my Lord.


A Widow then?


Neither, my Lord.


Why you are nothing then: neither Maid, Widow, nor Wife?


My Lord, she may be a Puncke: for many of them, are neither Maid, Widow, nor
Wife


Silence that fellow: I would he had some cause to prattle for himself.


Well my Lord.


My Lord, I do confess I nere was married,
And I confess besides, I am no Maid,
I have known my husband, yet my husband
Knows not, that ever he knew me.

He was drunk then, my Lord, it can be no better.


For the benefit of silence, would thou were so to.


Well, my Lord.


This is no witness for Lord Angelo.


Now I come to it, my Lord.
She that accuses him of Fornication,
In selfsame manner, does accuse my husband,
And charges him, my Lord, with such a time,
When I Will depose I had him mine Arms
With all the effect of Love.

Charges she more then me?


Not that I know.


No? you say your husband.


Why just, my Lord, and that is Angelo,
Who thinks he knows, that he nere knew my body,
But knows, he thinks, that he knows Isabels.

This is a strange abuse: Let Us see thy face.


My husband bids me, now I will unmask.
This is that face, thou cruel Angelo
Which once thou sworst, was worth the looking on:
This is the hand, which with a vowed contract
Was fast belockt in thine: This is the body
That took away the match from Isabell,
And did supply thee at thy garden-house
In her Imagined person.

Know you this woman?


Carnally she says.


Sirrah, no more.


Enoug my Lord.


My Lord, I must confess, I know this woman,
And five years since there was some speech of marriage
Betwixt my self, and her: which was broke off,
Partly for that her promised proportions
Came short of Composition: But in chief
For that her reputation was dis-valued
In leuitie: Since which time of five years
I never spoke with her, saw her, nor heard from her
Upon my faith, and honor.

Noble Prince,
As there comes light from heaven, and words from breath,
As there is sense in truth, and truth in virtue,
I am affianced this man's wife, as strongly
As words could make up vows: And my good Lord,
But Tuesday night last gone, in's garden house,
He knew me as a wife. As this is true,
Let me in safety raise me from my knees,
Or else for ever be confixed here
A Marble Monument.

I did but smile till now,
Now, good my Lord, give me the scope of Justice,
My patience here is touched: I do perceive
These poor informall women, are no more
But instruments of some more mightier member
That sets them on. Let me have way, my Lord
To find this practice out.

I, with my heart,
And punish them to your height of pleasure.
Thou foolish Friar, and thou pernicious woman
Compact with her that is gone: think thou, thy oaths,
Though they would swear down each particular Saint,
Were testimonies against his worth, and credit
That Is sealed in approbation? you, Lord Escalus
Sit with my Cozen, lend him your kind pains
To find out this abuse, whence it is derived.
There is another Friar that set them on,
Let him be sent for.

Would he were here, my Lord, for he indeed
Has set the women on to this Complaint;
Your Provost knows the place where he abides,
And he may fetch him.

Go, do it instantly:
And you, my noble and well-warranted Cosen
Whom it concerns to hear this matter forth,
Do with your injuries as seems you best
In any chastisement; I for a while
Will leave you; but stir not you till you have
Well determined upon these Slanderers.

My Lord, we will do it thoroughly: Signior Lucio, did not you say you knew that
Friar Lodowick to be a dishonest person


Cucullus non facit Monachum, honest in nothing but in his Clothes, and one
that has spoke most villainous speeches of the Duke


We shall entreat you to abide here till he come, and enforce them against
him: we shall find this Friar a notable fellow


As any in Vienna, on my word.


Call that same Isabell here once again, I would speak with her: pray you, my
Lord, give me leave to question, you shall see how I Will handle her


Not better then he, by her own report.


Say you?


Marry sir, I think, if you handled her privately She would sooner confess,
perchance publicly she will be ashamed


I will go darkely to work with her.


That Is the way: for women are light at midnight.


Come on Mistress, here is a Gentlewoman,
Denies all that you have said.

My Lord, here comes the rascal I spoke of,
Here, with the Provost.

In very good time: speak not you to him, till we call upon you.


Mum.


Come Sir, did you set these women on to slander Lord Angelo? they have
confes'd you did


It Is false.


How? Know you where you are?


Respect to your great place; and let the devil
Be sometime honored, for his burning throne.
Where is the Duke? it is he should hear me speak.

The Duke's in us: and we will hear you speak,
Look you speak justly.

Boldly, at least. But oh poor souls,
Come you to seek the Lamb here of the Fox;
Good night to your redress: Is the Duke gone?
Then is your cause gone too: The Duke's unjust,
Thus to retort your manifest Appeal,
And put your trial in the villains mouth,
Which here you come to accuse.

This is the rascal: this is he I spoke of.


Why thou irreverent, and unhallowed Friar:
Is It not enough thou have suborned these women,
To accuse this worthy man? but in foul mouth,
And in the witness of his proper ear,
To call him villain; and then to glance from him,
To the Duke himself, to tax him with Injustice?
Take him hence; to the rack with him: we'll towze you
Joint by joint, but we will know his purpose:
What? unjust?

Be not so hot: the Duke dare
No more stretch this finger of mine, then he
Dare rack his own: his Subject am I not,
Nor here Provincial: My business in this State
Made me a looker on here in Vienna,
Where I have seen corruption boil and bubble,
Till it ore-run the Stew: Laws, for all faults,
But faults so countenanced, that the strong Statutes
Stand like the forfeites in a Barbers shop,
As much in mock, as mark.

Slander to the State:
Away with him to prison.

What can you vouch against him Signior Lucio?
Is this the man that you did tell us of?

It Is he, my Lord: come hither goodman bald-pate, do you know me?


I remember you Sir, by the sound of your voice,
I met you at the Prison, in the absence of the Duke.

Oh, did you so? and do you remember what you said of the Duke.


Most notedly Sir.


Do you so Sir: And was the Duke a flesh-monger, a fool, and a coward, as you
then reported him to be


You must (Sir) change persons with me, ere you make that my report: you
indeed spoke so of him, and much more, much worse


Oh thou damnable fellow: did not I pluck thee by the nose, for thy speeches?


I protest, I love the Duke, as I love my self.


Hark how the villain would close now, after his treasonable abuses.


Such a fellow is not to be talked withal: Away with him to prison: Where is
the Provost? away with him to prison: lay bolts enough upon him: let him speak
no more: away with those Giglets too* and with the other confederate companion


Stay Sir, stay a while.


What, resists he? help him Lucio.


Come sir, come sir, come sir: foh sir, why you bald-pated lying rascal: you
must be hooded must you? show your knaves visage with a pox to you: show your
sheepe-biting face, and be hanged an hour: will it not off


Thou art the first knave, that ere made a Duke.
First Provost, let me bail these gentle three:
Sneake not away Sir, for the Friar, and you,
Must have a word anon: lay hold on him.

This may prove worse then hanging.


What you have spoke, I pardon: sit you down,
We'll borrow place of him; Sir, by your leave:
Have thou or word, or wit, or impudence,
That yet can do thee office? If thou have
Rely upon it, till my tale be heard,
And hold no longer out.

Oh, my dread Lord,
I should be guiltier then my guiltiness,
To think I can be vndiscerneable,
When I perceive your grace, like power divine,
Has looked upon my passes. Then good Prince,
No longer Session hold upon my shame,
But let my Trial, be mine own Confession:
Immediate sentence then, and sequent death,
Is all the grace I beg.

Come hither Mariana,
Say: was it thou ere contracted to this woman?

I was my Lord.


Go take her hence, and marry her instantly.
Do you the office (Friar) which consummate,
Return him here again: go with him Provost.

My Lord, I am more amazed at his dishonor,
Then at the strangeness of it.

Come hither Isabell,
Your Friar is now your Prince: As I was then
Aduertysing, and holy to your business,
(Not changing heart with habit) I am still,
Atturnied at your service.

Oh give me pardon
That I, your vassaile, have imploid, and pained
Your unknown Sovereignty.

You are pardoned Isabell:
And now, dear Maid, be you as free to us.
Your Brothers death I know sits at your heart:
And you may marvel, why I obscured my self,
Laboring to save his life: and would not rather
Make rash remonstrance of my hidden power,
Then let him so be lost: oh most kind Maid,
It was the swift celeritie of his death,
Which I did think, with slower foot came on,
That brained my purpose: but peace be with him,
That life is better life past fearing death,
Then that which lives to fear: make it your comfort,
So happy is your Brother.

I do my Lord.


For this new-maried man, approaching here,
Whose salt imagination yet has wronged
Your well defended honor: you must pardon
For Mariana's sake: But as he adiudg'd your Brother,
Being criminal, in double violation
Of sacred Chastity, and of promise-breach,
Thereon dependant for your Brothers life,
The very mercy of the Law cries out
Most audible, even from his proper tongue.
An Angelo for Claudio, death for death:
Haste still paies haste, and leisure, answers leisure;
Like does quit like, and Measure still for Measure:
Then Angelo, thy fault's thus manifested;
Which though thou would deny, denies thee vantage.
We do condemn thee to the very Block
Where Claudio stooped to death; and with like haste.
Away with him.

Oh my most gracious Lord,
I hope you will not mock me with a husband?

It is your husband mocked you with a husband,
Consenting to the safeguard of your honor,
I thought your marriage fit: else Imputation,
For that he knew you* might reproach your life,
And choke your good to come: For his Possessions,
Although by confutation they are ours;
We do en-state, and widow you with all,
To buy you a better husband.

Oh my dear Lord,
I crave no other, nor no better man.

Never crave him, we are definitive.


Gentle my Liege.


You do but loose your labor.
Away with him to death: Now Sir, to you.

Oh my good Lord, sweet Isabell, take my part,
Lend me your knees, and all my life to come,
I Will lend you all my life to do you service.

Against all sense you do importune her,
Should she kneel down, in mercy of this fact,
Her Brothers ghost, his paued bed would break,
And take her hence in horror.

Isabell:
Sweet Isabel, do yet but kneel by me,
Hold up your hands, say nothing: I Will speak all.
They say best men are molded out of faults,
And for the most, become much more the better
For being a little bad: So may my husband.
Oh Isabel: will you not lend a knee?

He dies for Claudio's death.


Most bounteous Sir.
Look if it please you, on this man condemned,
As if my Brother lived: I partly think,
A due sincerity governed his deeds,
Till he did look on me: Since it is so,
Let him not die: my Brother had but Justice,
In that he did the thing for which he did.
For Angelo, his Act did not ore-take his bad intent,
And must be buried but as an intent
That perished by the way: thoughts are no subjects
Intents, but merely thoughts.

Merely my Lord.


Your suite's unprofitable: stand up I say:
I have bethought me of another fault.
Provost, how came it Claudio was beheaded
At an unusual hour?

It was commanded so.


Had you a special warrant for the deed?


No my good Lord: it was by private message.


For which I do discharge you of your office,
Give up your keys.

Pardon me, noble Lord,
I thought it was a fault, but knew it not,
Yet did repent me after more advice,
For testimony whereof, one in the prison
That should by private order else have did,
I have reserved alive.

What Is he?


His name is Barnardine.


I would thou had done so by Claudio:
Go fetch him hither, let me look upon him.

I am sorry, one so learned, and so wise
As you, Lord Angelo, have still appeared,
Should slip so grossly, both in the heat of blood
And lack of tempered judgment afterward.

I am sorry, that such sorrow I procure,
And so deep sticks it in my penitent heart,
That I crave death more willingly then mercy,
It Is my deserving, and I do entreat it.

Which is that Barnardine?


This my Lord.


There was a Friar told me of this man.
Sirrah, thou art said to have a stubborn soul
That apprehends no further then this world,
And squar'st thy life according: You Are condemned,
But for those earthly faults, I quit them all,
And pray thee take this mercy to provide
For better times to come: Friar advise him,
I leave him to your hand. What muffeld fellow's that?

This is another prisoner that I saved,
Who should have di'd when Claudio lost his head,
As like almost to Claudio, as himself.

If he be like your brother, for his sake
Is he pardoned, and for your lovely sake
Give me your hand, and say you will be mine,
He is my brother too: But fitter time for that:
By this Lord Angelo perceiues he is safe,
Methinkes I see a quickening in his eye:
Well Angelo, your evil quits you well.
Look that you love your wife: her worth, worth yours
I find an apt remission in my self:
And yet here is one in place I cannot pardon,
You sirrah, that knew me for a fool, a Coward,
One all of Luxury, an ass, a mad man:
Wherein have I so deserved of you
That you extol me thus?

Faith my Lord, I spoke it but according to the trick: if you will hang me for
it you may: but I had rather it would please you, I might be whipped


Whipped first, sir, and hanged after.
Proclaim it Provost round about the City;
If any woman wronged by this lewd fellow
(As I have heard him swear himself there is one whom he begot with child)
let her appear
And he shall marry her: the nuptial finished,
Let him be whipped and hanged.

I beseech your Highness do not marry me to a Whore: your Highness said even
now I made you a Duke, good my Lord do not recompense me, in making me a
Cuckold


Upon mine honor thou shall marry her,
Thy slanders I forgive, and therewithal
Remit thy other forfeits: take him to prison,
And see our pleasure herein executed.

Marrying a punke my Lord, is pressing to death,
Whipping and hanging.

Slandering a Prince deserves it.
She Claudio that you wronged, look you restore.
Joy to you Mariana, love her Angelo:
I have confes'd her, and I know her virtue.
Thanks good friend, Escalus, for thy much goodness,
There Is more behind that is more gratulate.
Thanks Provost for thy care, and secrecy,
We shall employ thee in a worthier place.
Forgive him Angelo, that brought you home
The head of Ragozine for Claudio's,
The offense pardons it self. Dear Isabell,
I have a motion much imports your good,
Whereto if you will a willing ear incline;
What Is mine is yours, and what is yours is mine.
So bring us to our Palace, where we will show
What Is yet behind, that meet you all should know.


