IN sooth I know not why I am so sad,
It wearies me: you say it wearies you;
But how I caught it, found it, or came by it,
What stuff it is made of, whereof it is borne,
I am to learn: and such a Want-wit sadness makes of me,
That I have much ado to know my self.

Your mind is tossing on the Ocean,
There where your Argosies with portly sail
Like Signiors and rich Burgers on the flood,
Or as it were the Pageants of the sea,
Do ouer-peere the petty Traffiquers
That curtsie to them, do them reverence
As they fly by them with their wouen wings.

Believe me sir, had I such venture forth,
The better part of my affections, would
Be with my hopes abroad. I should be still
Plucking the grass to know where sits the wind,
Peering in Maps for ports, and peers, and rodes:
And every object that might make me fear
Misfortune to my ventures, out of doubt
Would make me sad.

My wind cooling my broth,
Would blow me to an Ague, when I thought
What harm a wind too great might do at sea.
I should not see the sandy houre-glasse run,
But I should think of shallows, and of flats,
And see my wealthy Andrew docks in sand,
Vailing her high top lower then her ribs
To kiss her burial; should I go to Church
And see the holy edifice of stone,
And not bethink me straight of dangerous rocks,
Which touching but my gentle Vessels side
Would scatter all her spices on the stream,
Enrobe the roaring waters with my silks,
And in a word, but even now worth this,
And now worth nothing. Shall I have the thought
To think on this, and shall I lack the thought
That such a thing bechaunc'd would make me sad*
But tell not me, I know Anthonio
Is sad to think upon his merchandise.

Believe me no, I thank my fortune for it,
My ventures are not in one bottom trufted,
Nor to one place; nor is my whole estate
Upon the fortune of this present year:
Therefore my merchandise makes me not sad.

Why then you are in love.


Fie, fie.


Not in love neither: then let us say you are sad
Because you are not merry; and 'twere as easy
For you to laugh and leap, and say you are merry
Because you are not sad. Now by two-headed Ianus,
Nature has framed strange fellows in her time:
Some that will evermore peep through their eyes,
And laugh like Parrats at a bag-piper.
And other of such vinegar aspect,
That they will not show their teeth in way of smile,
Though Nestor swear the jest be laughable.

Here comes Bassanio,
Your most noble Kinsman,
Gratiano, and Lorenso. Faryewell,
We leave you now with better company.

I would have staid till I had made you merry,
If worthier friends had not prevented me.

Your worth is very dear in my regard.
I take it your own business calls on you,
And you embrace the occasion to depart.

Good morrow my good Lords.


Good signiors both, when shall we laugh? say, when?
You grow exceeding strange: must it be so?

We Will make our leysures to attend on yours.


My Lord Bassanio, since you have found Anthonio
We two will leave you, but at dinner time
I pray you have in mind where we must meet.

I will not fail you.


You look not well signior Anthonio,
You have too much respect upon the world:
They loose it that do buy it with much care,
Believe me you are maruellously changed.

I hold the world but as the world Gratiano,
A stage, where every man must play a part,
And mine a sad one.

Let me play the fool,
With mirth and laughter let old wrinckles come,
And let my Liver rather heat with wine,
Then my heart cool with mortifying groans.
Why should a man whose blood is warm within,
Sit like his Grandsire, cut in Alablaster?
Sleep when he wakes? and creep into the Iaundies
By being peevish? I tell thee what Anthonio,
I love thee, and it is my love that speaks:
There are a sort of men, whose visages
Do cream and mantle like a standing pond,
And do a wilful stillness entertain,
With purpose to be dressed in an opinion
Of wisdom, gravity, profound conceit,
As who should say, I am sir an Oracle,
And when I open my lips, let no dog bark.
O my Anthonio, I do know of these
That therefore only are reputed wise,
For saying nothing; when I am very sure
If they should speak, would almost dam those ears
Which hearing them would call their brothers fools:
I Will tell thee more of this another time.
But fish not with this melancholy bait
For this fool Gudgin, this opinion:
Come good Lorenzo, faryewell a while,
I Will end my exhortation after dinner.

Well, we will leave you then till dinner time.
I must be one of these same dumb wise men,
For Gratiano never let us me speak.

Well, keep me company but two years mo,
Thou shall not know the sound of thine own tongue.

Far you well, I Will grow a talker for this gear.


Thanks in faith, for silence is only commendable
In a neats tongue dried, and a maid not vendible.

It is that any thing now.


Gratiano speaks an infinite deal of nothing, more then any man in all
Venice, his reasons are two grains of wheat hid in two bushels of chafe: you
shall seek all day ere you find them, and when you have them they are not
worth the search


Well: tell me now, what Lady is the same
To whom you swore a secret Pilgrimage
That you to day promised to tell me of?

It Is not unknown to you Anthonio
How much I have disabled mine estate,
By something showing a more swelling port
Then my faint means would grant continuance:
Nor do I now make moan to be abridg'd
From such a noble rate, but my chief care
Is to come fairly off from the great debts
Wherein my time something too prodigal
Has left me gagged: to you Anthonio
I owe the most in money, and in love,
And from your love I have a warrantie
To unburden all my plots and purposes,
How to get clear of all the debts I owe.

I pray you good Bassanio let me know it,
And if it stand as you your self still do,
Within the eye of honor, be assured
My purse, my person, my extremest means
Lie all vnlock'd to your occasions.

In my school days, when I had lost one shaft
I shot his fellow of the selfsame flight
The selfsame way, with more advised watch
To find the other forth, and by aduenturing both,
I often found both. I urge this child-hoode proof,
Because what follows is pure innocence.
I owe you much, and like a wilful youth,
That which I owe is lost: but if you please
To shoot another arrow that self way
Which you did shoot the first, I do not doubt,
As I will watch the aim: Or to find both,
Or bring your latter hazard back again,
And thankfully rest debtor for the first.

You know me well, and herein spend but time
To wind about my love with circumstance,
And out of doubt you do more wrong
In making question of my uttermost
Then if you had made waste of all I have:
Then do but say to me what I should do
That in your knowledge may by me be done,
And I am pressed unto it: therefore speak.

In Belmont is a Lady richly left,
And she is fair, and fairer then that word,
Of wondrous virtues, sometimes from her eyes
I did receive fair speechless messages:
Her name is Portia, nothing vndervallewd
To Cato's daughter, Brutus Portia,
Nor is the wide world ignorant of her worth,
For the four winds blow in from every coast
Renowned suitors, and her sunny locks
Hang on her temples like a golden fleece,
Which makes her seat of Belmont Cholchos strond,
And many Iasons come in quest of her.
O my Anthonio, had I but the means
To hold a rival place with one of them,
I have a mind presages me such thrift,
That I should questionless be fortunate.

Thou know that all my fortunes are at sea,
Neither have I money, nor commodity
To raise a present sum, therefore go forth
Try what my credit can in Venice do,
That shall be rackt even to the uttermost,
To furnish thee to Belmont to fair Portia.
Go presently enquire, and so will I
Where money is, and I no question make
To have it of my trust, or for my sake.

By my troth Nerrissa, my little body is a weary of this great world.


You would be sweet Madam, if your miseries were in the same abundance as your
good fortunes are: and yet for ought I see, they are as sick that surfeit with
too much, as they that starve with nothing; it is no small happiness therefore
to be seated in the mean, superfluity comes sooner by white hairs, but
competencie lives longer


Good sentences, and well pronounced.


They would be better if well followed.


If to do were as easy as to know what were good to do, Chapels had been
Churches, and poor men's cottages Princes Pallaees: it is a good Divine that
follows his own instructions; I can easier teach twenty what were good to be
done, then be one of the twenty to follow mine own teaching: the brain may
devise laws for the blood, but a hot temper leapes ore a cold decree, such a
hare is madness the youth, to skip ore the meshes of good counsel the
cripple; but this reason is not in fashion to choose me a husband: O me, the
word choose, I may neither choose whom I would, nor refuse whom I dislike, so
is the will of a living daughter curbed by the will of a dead father: it is not
hard Nerrissa, that I cannot choose one, nor refuse none


Your father was ever virtuous, and holy men at their death have good
inspirations, therefore the lotterie that he has deuis^ in these three chests
of gold, silver, and lead, whereof who chooses his meaning, chooses you, will
no doubt never be chosen by any rightly, but one who you shall rightly love:
but what warmth is there in your affection toward any of these Princely suitors
that are already come


I pray thee ouer-name them, and as thou namest them, I will describe them, and
according to my description level at my affection


First there is the Neopolitane Prince.


I that is a colt indeed, for he does nothing but talk of his horse, and he
makes it a great appropriation to his own good parts that he can shoo him
himself: I am much afraid my Lady his mother played false with a Smyth


Than is there the County Palentine.


He does nothing but frown (as who should say, and you will not have me,
choose: he hears merry tales and smiles not, I fear he will prove the
weeping Philosopher when he grows old, being so full of unmannerly sadness in
his youth.) I had rather to be married to a deaths head with a bone in his
mouth, then to either of these: God defend me from these two


How say you by the French Lord, Mounsier Le Boune?


God made him, and therefore let him pass for a man, in truth I know it is a
sin to be a mocker, but he, why he has a horse better then the Neopolitans,
a better bad habit of frowning then the Count Palentine, he is every man in no
man, if a Trassell sing, he falls straight a capring, he will fence with his own
shadow. If I should marry him, I should marry twenty husbands: if he would
despise me, I would forgive him, for if he love me to madness, I should never
requite him


What say you then to Fauconbridge, the young Baron of England?


You know I say nothing to him, for he understands not me, nor I him: he has
neither Latin, French, nor Italian, and you will come into the Court and
swear that I have a poor pennie-worth in the English: he is a proper man's
picture, but alas who can converse with a dumb show? how odly he is suited, I
think he bought his doublet in Italy, his round hose in France, his bonnet in
Germany, and his behavior every where


What think you of the other Lord his neighbor?


That he has a neighbourly charity in him, for he borrowed a box of the ear
of the Englishman, and swore he would pay him again when he was able: I
think the Frenchman became his surety, and sealed under for another


How like you the young German, the Duke of Saxonies Nephew?


Very vildely in the morning when he is sober, and most vildely in the
afternoon when he is drunk: when he is best, he is a little worse then a
man, and when he is worst* he is little better then a beast: and the worst fall
that ever fell, I hope I shall make shift to go without him


If he should offer to choose, and choose the right Casket, you should refuse
to perform your Fathers will, if you should refuse to accept him


Therefore for fear of the worst, I pray thee set a deep glass of
Reinish-wine on the contrary Casket, for if the devil be within, and that
temptation without, I know he will choose it. I will do any thing Nerrissa ere
I will be married to a sponge


You need not fear Lady the having any of these Lords, they have acquainted
me with their determinations, which is indeed to return to their home, and to
trouble you with no more suite, unless you may be won by some other sort then
your Fathers imposition, depending on the Caskets


If I live to be as old as Sibilla, I will dye as chaste as Diana: unless I
be obtained by the manner of my Fathers will: I am glad this parcel of wooers
are so reasonable, for there is not one among them but I doat on his very
absence: and I wish them a fair departure


Do you not remember Lady in your Fathers time, a Venecian, a Scholar and a
Souldior that came hither in company of the Marquess of Mountferrat


Yes, yes, it was Bassanio, as I think, so was he called.


True Madam, he of all the men that ever my foolish eyes looked upon, was the
best deserving a fair Lady


I remember him well, and I remember him worthy of thy praise.


The four Strangers seek you Madam to take their leave: and there is a
forerunner come from a fifth, the Prince of Moroco, who brings word the Prince
his Master will be here to night


If I could bid the fifth welcome with so good heart as I can bid the other
four farewell, I should be glad of his approach: if he have the condition of a
Saint, and the complexion of a devil, I had rather he should shriue me then
wiue me. Come Nerrissa, sir go before; whiles we shut the gate upon one
wooer, another knocks at the door


Three thousand ducates, well.


I sir, for three months.


For three months, well.


For the which, as I told you,
Anthonio shall be bound.

Anthonio shall become bound, well.


May you sted me? Will you pleasure me?
Shall I know your answer.

Three thousand ducats for three months, and Anthonio bound.


Your answer to that.


Anthonio is a good man.


Have you heard any imputation to the contrary.


Ho no, no, no, no: my meaning in saying he is a good man, is to have you
understand me that he is suffient, yet his means are in supposition: he has
an Argosie bound to Tripolis, another to the Indies, I understand moreover upon
the Ryalta, he has a third at Mexico, a fourth for England, and other ventures
he has squandred abroad, but ships are but boords, Sailors but men, there be
land rats, and water rats, water thieves, and land thieves, I mean Pirates, and
then there is the perrill of waters, winds, and rocks: the man is
notwithstanding sufficient, three thousand ducats, I think I may take his bond


Be assured you may.


I will be assured I may: and that I may be assured, I will bethink me, may I
speak with Anthonio


If it please you to dine with us.


Yes, to smell porke, to eat of the habitation which your Prophet the Nazarite
coniured the devil into: I will buy with you, sell with you, talk with you,
walk with you, and so following: but I will not eat with you, drink with
you, nor pray with you. What news on the Ryalta, who is he comes here


This is signior Anthonio.


How like a fawning publican he looks.
I hate him for he is a Christian:
But more, for that in low simplicity
He lends out money gratis, and brings down
The rate of vsance here with us in Venice.
If I can catch him once upon the hip,
I will feed fat the ancient grudge I bear him.
He hates our sacred Nation, and he railes
Even there where Merchants most do congregate
On me, my bargains, and my well-worne thrift,
Which he calls interrest: Cursed be my Trybe
If I forgive him.

Shylock, do you hear.


I am debating of my present store,
And by the near guess of my memory
I cannot instantly raise up the gross
Of full three thousand ducats: what of that?
Tuball a wealthy Hebrew of my Tribe
Will furnish me; but soft, how many months
Do you desire? Rest you fair good signior,
Your worship was the last man in our mouths.

Shylocke, albeit I neither lend nor borrow
By taking, nor by giving of excess,
Yet to supply the ripe wants of my friend,
I Will break a custom: is he yet possessed
How much he would?

I, I, three thousand ducats


And for three months.


I had forgot, three months, you told me so.
Well then, your bond: and let me see, but hear you,
Me thoughts you said, you neither lend nor borrow
Upon advantage.

I do never use it.


When Jacob grazed his Uncle Labans sheep,
This Jacob from our holy Abram was
(As his wife mother wrought in his behalf)
The third possesser; I, he was the third.

And what of him, did he take interrest?


No, not take interest, not as you would say
Directly interest, mark what Jacob did,
When Laban and himself were compremyz'd
That all the canelings which were streakt and pied
Should fall as Jacobs hier, the Ewes being rank,
In end of Autumn turned to the Rams,
And when the work of generation was
Between these woolly breeders in the act,
The skillful shepherd pil'd me certain wands,
And in the doing of the deed of kind,
He stuck them up before the fulsome Ewes,
Who then conceauing, did in eaning time
Fall party-colored lambs, and those were Jacobs.
This was a way to thrive, and he was blessed:
And thrift is blessing if men steal it not.

This was a venture sir that Jacob served for,
A thing not in his power to bring to pass,
But swayed and fashioned by the hand of heaven.
Was this inserted to make interrest good?
Or is your gold and silver Ewes and Rams?

I cannot tell, I make it breed as fast,
But note me signior.

Mark you this Bassanio,
The devil can cite Scripture for his purpose,
An evil soul producing holy witness,
Is like a villain with a smiling cheek,
A goodly apple rotten at the heart.
O what a goodly outside falsehood has.

Three thousand ducats, it is a good round sum.
Three months from twelve, then let me see the rate.

Well Shylocke, shall we be beholding to you?


Signior Anthonio, many a time and often
In the Ryalto you have rated me
About my moneys and my vsances:
Still have I borne it with a patient shrug,
(For suffrance is the badge of all our Tribe.)
You call me misbeleeuer, cut-throate dog,
And spet upon my Jewish gaberdine,
And all for use of that which is mine own.
Well then, it now appears you need my help:
Go to then, you come to me, and you say,
Shylocke, we would have moneys, you say so:
You that did void your rume upon my beard,
And foot me as you spurn a stranger curre
Over your threshold, moneys is your suite.
What should I say to you? Should I not say,
Has a dog money? Is it possible
A curre should lend three thousand ducats? or
Shall I bend low, and in a bond-mans key
With bated breath, and whispring humbleness,
Say this: Fair sir, you spet on me on Wednesday last;
You spurned me such a day; another time
You called me dog: and for these courtesies
I Will lend you thus much moneys.

I am as like to call thee so again,
To spet on thee again, to spurn thee too.
If thou will lend this money, lend it not
As to thy friends, for when did friendship take
A breed of barraine metal of his friend?
But lend it rather to thine enemy,
Who if he break, thou may with better face
Exact the penalties.

Why look you how you storm,
I would be friends with you, and have your love,
Forget the shames that you have staind me with,
Supply your present wants, and take no doite
Of vsance for my moneys, and you will not hear me,
This is kind I offer.

This were kindness.


This kindness will I show,
Go with me to a Notarie, seal me there
Your single bond, and in a merry sport*
If you repaie me not on such a day,
In such a place, such sum or sums as are
Expressed in the condition, let the forfeite
Be nominated for an equal pound
Of your fair flesh, to be cut off and taken
In what part of your body it pleases me.

Content infaith, I Will seal to such a bond,
And say there is much kindness in the Jew.

You shall not seal to such a bond for me,
I Will rather dwell in my necessity.

Why fear not man, I will not forfaite it*
Within these two months, that is a month before
This bond expires, I do expect return
Of thrice three times the value of this bond.

O father Abram, what these Christians are,
Whose own hard dealings teaches them suspect
The thoughts of others: Pray you tell me this,
If he should break his day, what should I gain
By the exaction of the forfeiture?
A pound of man's flesh taken from a man,
Is not so estimable, profitable neither
As flesh of Muttons, Beefes, or Goats, I say
To buy his favor. I extend this friendship,
If he will take it, so: if not adieu,
And for my love I pray you wrong me not.

Yes Shylocke, I will seal unto this bond.


Then meet me forthwith at the Notaries,
Give him direction for this merry bond,
And I will go and purse the ducats strait.
See to my house left in the fearful guard
Of an unthrifty knave: and presently
I Will be with you.

Hie thee gentle Jew. This Hebrew will turn Christian, he grows kind.


I like not fair teames, and a villains mind.


Come on, in this there can be no dismaie,
My Ships come home a month before the day.

Mislike me not for my complexion,
The shadowed liuerie of the burnisht sun,
To whom I am a neighbor, and near bred.
Bring me the fairest creature Northward borne,
Where Phoebus fire scarce thawes the ysicles,
And let us make ineision for your love,
To prove whose blood is reddest, his or mine.
I tell thee Lady this aspect of mine
Has feared the valiant, (by my love I swear)
The best regarded Virgins of our Clyme
Have loved it to: I would not change this hue,
Except to steal your thoughts my gentle Queen.

In terms of choice I am not solie led
By nice direction of a maidens eyes:
Besides, the lottrie of my destenie
Bare me the right of voluntary choosing:
But if my Father had not scanted me,
And hedged me by his wit to yield my self
His wife, who wins me by that means I told you,
Your self (renowned Prince) than stood as fair
As any commer I have looked on yet
For my affection.

Even for that I thank you,
Therefore I pray you lead me to the Caskets
To try my fortune: By this Sy^tas^
That slew the Sophie, and a Persian Prince
That won three fields of Sultan-Solyman,
I would ore-stare the sternest eyes that look:
Out-braue the heart most daring on the earth:
Pluck the young sucking Cubs from the she Bear,
Yea, mock the Lion when he rores for pray
To win the Lady: But alas, the while
If Hercules and Lychas play at dice
Which is the better man, the greater throw
May turn by fortune from the weaker hand:
So is Alcides beaten by his rage,
And so may I, blind fortune leading me
Miss that which one vnworthier may attain,
And die with grieuing.

You must take your chance,
And either not attempt to choose at all,
Or swear before you choose, if you choose wrong
Never to speak to Lady afterward
In way of marriage, therefore be advised.

Nor will not, come bring me unto my chance.


First forward to the temple, after dinner
Your hazard shall be made.

Good fortune then,
To make me blessed or cursed'st among men.

Certainly, my conscience will serve me to run from this Jew my Master: the
fiend is at mine elbow, and tempts me, saying to me, Iobbe, Launcelet Iobbe,
good Launcelet, ongood Iobbe, or good Launcelet Iobbe, use your legs, take the
start, run away: my conscience says no; take heed honest Launcelet, take
heed honest Iobbe, or as aforesaid honest Launcelet Iobbe, do not run,
scorn running with thy heels; well, the most coragious fiend bids me pack,
fia says the fiend, away says the fiend, for the heavens rouse up a brave
mind says the fiend, and run; well, my conscience hanging about the neck of
my heart, says very wisely to me: my honest friend Launcelet, being an honest
man's soon, or rather an honest woman's son, for indeed my Father did
something smack, something grow too; he had a kind of taste; well, my
conscience says Lancelet bouge not, bouge says the siend, bouge not says my
conscience, conscience say I you counsel well, fiend say I you counsel
well, to be ruled by my conscience I should stay with the Jew my Master, (who
God bless the mark) is a kind of devil; and to run away from the Jew I
should be ruled by the fiend, who saving your reverence is the devil himself:
certainly the Jew is the very devil incarnation, and in my conscience, my
conscience is a kind of hard conscience, to offer to counsel me to stay with
the Jew; the fiend gives the more friendly counsel: I will run fiend, my
heels are at your commandment, I will run


Master yong-man, you I pray you, which is the way to Master Jews?


O heavens, this is my true begotten Father, who being more then sand-blinde,
high grauel blind, knows me not, I will try confusions with him


Master young Gentleman, I pray you which is the way to Master Jews.


Turn upon your right hand at the next turning but at the next turning of all
on your left; marry at the very next turning, turn of no hand, but turn down
indirectlie to the Jews house


Be Gods sonties 'twill be a hard way to hit, can you tell me whether one
Launcelet that dwells with him, dwell with him or no


Talk you of young Master Launcelet, mark me now, now will I raise the waters;
talk you of young Master Launcelet


No Master sir, but a poor man's son, his Father though I say it is an honest
exceeding poor man, and God be thanked well to live


Well, let his Father be what a will, we talk of young Master Launcelet.


Your worships friend and Launcelet.


But I pray you ergo old man, ergo I beseech you, talk you of young Master
Launcelet


Of Launcelet, ant please your maistership.


Ergo Master Lancelet, talk not of master Lancelet Father, for the young
gentleman according to fates and destinies, and such odd sayings, the sisters
three, and such branches of learning, is indeed deceased, or as you would say
in plain terms, gone to heaven


Marry God forbid, the boy was the very staff of my age, my very prop.


Do I look like a cudgel or a houell-post, a staff or a prop: do you know me
Father


Alack the day, I know you not young Gentleman, but I pray you tell me, is my
boy God rest his soul alive or dead


Do you not know me Father.


Alack sir I am sand blind, I know you not.


Nay, indeed if you had your eyes you might fail of the knowing me: it is a
wise Father that knows his own child. Well, old man, I will tell you news
of your son, give me your blessing, truth will come to light, murder cannot be
hid long, a man's son may, but in the end truth will out


Pray you sir stand up, I am sure you are not Lancelet my boy.


Pray you let us have no more fooling about it, but give me your blessing: I
am Lancelet your boy that was, your son that is, your child that shall be


I cannot think you are my son.


I know not what I shall think of that: but I am Lancelet the Jews man, and I
am sure Margerie your wife is my mother


Her name is Margerie indeed, I Will be sworn if thou be Lancelet, thou art mine
own flesh and blood: Lord worshipped might he be, what a beard have thou got;
thou have got more hair on thy chin, then Dobbin my philhorse has on his tail


It should seem then that Dobbins tail grows backward. I am sure he had
more hair of his tail then I have of my face when I lost saw him


Lord how art thou changed: how do thou and thy Master agree, I have brought
him a present; how gree you now


Well, well, but for mine own part, as I have set up my rest to run away, so
I will not rest till I have run some ground; my Maister's a very Jew, give him
a present, give him a halter, I am famisht in his service. You may tell every
finger I have with my ribs: Father I am glad you are come, give me your present
to one Master Bassanio, who indeed gives rare new Liuories, if I serve not
him, I will run as far as God has any ground. O rare, fortune, here comes the
man, to him Father, for I am a Jew if I serve the Jew any longer


You may do so, but let it be so hasted that supper be ready at the farthest
by five of the clock: see these Letters delivered, put the Liueries to making,
and desire Gratiano to come anon to my lodging


To him Father.


God bless your worship.


Gramercie, would thou ought with me.


Here Is my son sir, a poor boy.


Not a poor boy sir, but the rich Jews man that would sir as my Father shall
specify


He has a great infection sir, as one would say to serve.


Indeed the short and the long is, I serve the Jew, and have a desire as my
Father shall specify


His Master and he (saving your worships reverence) are scarce caterconns.


To be brief, the very truth is, that the Jew having done me wrong, does
cause me as my Father being I hope an old man shall frutifie unto you


I have here a dish of Doves that I would bestow upon your worship, and my
suite is


In very brief, the suite is impertinent to my self, as your worship shall
know by this honest old man, and though I say it, though old man, yet poor man
my Father


One speak for both, what would you?


Serve you sir.


That is the very defect of the matter sir.


I know thee well, thou have obtained thy suite,
Shylocke thy Master spoke with me this day,
And has preferred thee, if it be preferment
To leave a rich Jews service, to become
The follower of so poor a Gentleman,

The old proverb is very well parted between my Master Shylocke and you
sir, you have the grace of God sir, and he has enough


Thou speak it well; go Father with thy Son,
Take leave of thy old Master, and enquire
My lodging out, give him a Liuerie
More guarded then his fellows: see it done.

Father in, I cannot get a service, no, I have nere a tongue in my head, well:
if any man in Italy have a fairer table which does offer to swear upon a
book, I shall have good fortune; go too, here is a simple line of life, here is
a small trifle of wives, alas, fifteen wives is nothing, a leven widows and
nine maids is a simple coming in for one man, and then to escape drowning
thrice, and to be in peril of my life with the edge of a featherbed, here are
simple scapes: well, if Fortune be a woman, she is a good wench for this gere:
Father come, I Will take my leave of the Jew in the twinkling


I pray thee good Leonardo think on this,
These things being bought and orderly bestowed
Return in haste, for I do feast to night
My best esteemd acquaintance, hie thee go.

My best endeavors shall be done herein.


Where Is your Master.


Yonder sir he walks.


Signior Bassanio.


Gratiano.


I have a suit to you.


You have obtained it.


You must not deny me, I must go with you to Belmont.


Why then you must: but hear thee Gratiano,
Thou art to wild, to rude, and bold of voice,
Parts that become thee happily enough,
And in such eyes as ours appear not faults;
But where they are not known, why there they show
Something too liberal, pray thee take pain
To allay with some cold drops of modesty
Thy skipping spirit, least through thy wild behavior
I be misconsterd in the place I go to,
And loose my hopes.

Signor Bassanio, hear me,
If I do not put on a sober habit,
Talk with respect, and swear but now and than,
Wear prayer books in my pocket, look demurely,
Nay more, while grace is saying hood mine eyes
Thus with my hat, and sigh and say Amen:
Use all the observance of ciuillitie
Like one well studied in a sad ostent
To please his Grandam, never trust me more.

Well, we shall see your bearing.


Nay but I bar to night, you shall not gage me
By what we do to night.

No that were pity,
I would entreat you rather to put on
Your boldest suite of mirth, for we have friends
That purpose merriment: but far you well,
I have some business.

And I must to Lorenso and the rest,
But we will visit you at supper time.

I am sorry thou will leave my Father so,
Our house is hell, and thou a merry devil
Did rob it of some taste of tediousness;
But far thee well, there is a ducat for thee,
And Lancelet, soon at supper shall thou see
Lorenzo, who is thy new Masters guest,
Give him this Letter, do it secretly,
And so farewell: I would not have my Father
See me talk with thee.

Adue, tears exhibit my tongue, most beautiful Pagan, most sweet Jew, if a
Christian do not play the knave and get thee, I am much deceived; but adue,
these foolish drops do somewhat drown my manly spirit: adue


Farewell good Lancelet.
Alack, what heinous sin is it in me
To be ashamed to be my Fathers child,
But though I am a daughter to his blood,
I am not to his manners: O Lorenzo,
If thou keep promise I shall end this strife,
Become a Christian, and thy loving wife.

Nay, we will slinke away in supper time,
Disguise us at my lodging, and return all in an hour.

We have not made good preparation.


We have not spoke us yet of Torch-bearers.


It Is vile unless it may be quaintly ordered,
And better in my mind not undertook.

It Is now but four of clock, we have two hours
To furnish us; friend Lancelet what is the news.

And it shall please you to break up this, shall it seem to signify.


I know the hand, in faith it is a fair hand
And whiter then the paper it writ on,
I the fair hand that writ.

Love news in faith:


By your leave sir.


Whither go thou?


Marry sir to bid my old Master the Jew to sup to night with my new Master the
Christian


Hold here, take this, tell gentle Iessica
I will not fail her, speak it privately:
Go Gentlemen, will you prepare you for this Mask to night,
I am provided of a Torch-bearer.

I marry, i will be gone about it strait.


And so will I.


Meet me and Gratiano at Gratianos lodging
Some hour hence.

It Is good we do so.


Was not that Letter from fair Iessica?


I must needs tell thee all, she has directed
How I shall take her from her Fathers house,
What gold and jewels she is furnished with,
What Pages suite she has in readiness:
If ere the Jew her Father come to heaven,
It will be for his gentle daughters sake;
And never dare misfortune cross her foot,
Unless she do it under this excuse,
That she is issue to a faithless Jew:
Come go with me, pervse this as thou go,
Fair Iessica shall be my Torch-bearer.

Well, thou shall see, thy eyes shall be thy judge,
The difference of old Shylocke and Bassanio;
What Iessica, thou shall not gurmandize
As thou have done with me: what Iessica?
And sleep, and snore, and rend apparel out.
Why Iessica I say.

Why Iessica.


Who bids thee call? I do not bid thee call.


Your worship was wont to tell me
I could do nothing without bidding.

Call you? what is your will?


I am bid forth to supper Iessica,
There are my Keys: but wherefore should I go?
I am not bid for love, they flatttr me,
But yet I Will go in hate, to feed upon
The prodigal Christian. Iessica my girl,
Look to my house, I am right loath to go,
There is some ill a bruing toward my rest,
For I did dream of money bags to night.

I beseech you sir go, my young Master
Does expect your reproach.

So do I his.


And they have conspired together, I will not say you shall see a Mask, but if
you do, then it was not for nothing that my nose fell a bleeding on black
monday last, at six a clock ith morning, falling out that year on ashwensday
was four year in the afternoon


What are their maskes? hear you me Iessica,
Lock up my doors, and when you hear the drum
And the vile squealing of the wry-neckt Fife,
Clamber not you up to the casements then,
Nor thrust your head into the public street
To gaze on Christian fools with varnisht faces:
But stop my houses ears, I mean my casements,
Let not the sound of shallow fopperie enter
My sober house. By Jacobs staff I swear,
I have no mind of feasting forth to night:
But I will go: go you before me sir,
Say I will come.

I will go before sir.
Mistress look out at window for all this;
There will come a Christian by,
Will be worth a Jews eye.

What says that fool of Hagars offspring? ha.


His words were farewell mistress, nothing else.


The patch is kind enough, but a huge feeder:
Snaile-slow in profit, but he sleeps by day
More then the wilde-cat: drones hiue not with me,
Therefore I part with him, and part with him
To one that I would have him help to waste
His borrowed purse. Well Iessica go in,
Perhaps I will return immediately;
Do as I bid you, shut doors after you, fast bind, fast find,
A proverb never stale in thriftie mind.

Farewell, and if my fortune be not crossed,
I have a Father, you a daughter lost.

This is the penthouse under which Lorenzo
Desired us to make a stand.

His hour is almost past.


And it is marvel he out-dwels his hour,
For lovers ever run before the clock.

O ten times faster Venus Pidgions fly
To steal loves bonds new made, then they are wont
To keep obliged faith vnforfaited.

That ever holds, who rises from a feast
With that keen appetite that he sits down?
Where is the horse that does vntread again
His tedious measures with the vnbated fire,
That he did pace them first: all things that are,
Are with more spirit chased then enjoyed.
How like a younger or a prodigal
The skarfed bark puts from her native bay,
Hudg'd and embraced by the strumpet wind:
How like a prodigal does she return
With ouer-wither'd ribs and ragged sails,
Lean, rent, and beggered by the strumpet wind?

Here comes Lorenzo, more of this hereafter.


Sweet friends, your patience for my long abode,
Not I, but my affairs have made you wait:
When you shall please to play the thieves for wives
I Will watch as long for you then: approach
Here dwells my father Jew. Hoa, who is within?

Who are you? tell me for more certainty,
Albeit I Will swear that I do know your tongue.

Lorenzo, and thy Love.


Lorenzo certain, and my love indeed,
For who love I so much? and now who knows
But you Lorenzo, whether I am yours?

Heaven and thy thoughts are witness that thou art.


Here, catch this casket, it is worth the pains,
I am glad it is night, you do not look on me,
For I am much ashamed of my exchange:
But love is blind, and lovers cannot see
The pretty follies that themselves commit,
For if they could, Cupid himself would blush
To see me thus transformed to a boy.

Descend, for you must be my torch-bearer.


What, must I hold a Candle to my shames?
They in themselves goodsooth are too too light.
Why, it is an office of discovery Love,
And I should be obscured.

So you are sweet,
Even in the lovely garnish of a boy: but come at once,
For the close night does play the runaway,
And we are staid for at Bassanio's feast.

I will make fast the doors and guild my self
With some more ducats, and be with you straight.

Now by my hood, a gentle, and no Jew.


Beshrew me but I love her heartily.
For she is wise, if I can judge of her,
And fair she is, if that mine eyes be true,
And true she is, as she has proved her self:
And therefore like her self, wise, fair, and true,
Shall she be placed in my constant soul.
What, art thou come? on gentlemen, away,
Our masking mates by this time for us stay.

Who Is there?


Signior Anthonio?


Fie, fie, Gratiano, where are all the rest?
It Is nine a clock, our friends all stay for you,
No mask to night, the wind is come about,
Bassanio presently will go aboard,
I have sent twenty out to seek for you.

I am glad on it, I desire no more delight
Then to be under sail, and gone to night.

Go, draw aside the curtains, and discover
The several Caskets to this noble Prince:
Now make your choice.

The first of gold, who this inscription bears,
Who chooses me, shall gain what men desire.
The second silver, which this promise carries,
Who chooses me, shall get as much as he deserves.
This third, dull lead, with warning all as blunt,
Who chooses me, must give and hazard all he has.
How shall I know if I do choose the right?
How shall I know if I do choose the right.

The one of them contains my picture Prince,
If you choose that, then I am yours withal.

Some God direct my judgment, let me see,
I will suruay the inscriptions, back again:
What says this leaden casket?
Who chooses me, must give and hazard all he has.
Must give, for what? for lead, hazard for-lead?
This casket threatens men that hazard all
Do it in hope of fair advantages:
A golden mind stoopes not to shows of dross,
I Will then nor give nor hazard ought for lead.
What says the Silver with her virgin hue?
Who chooses me, shall get as much as he deserves.
As much as he deserves; pause there Morocho,
And weigh thy value with an even hand,
If thou beestrated by thy estimation
Thou do deserve enough, and yet enough
May not extend so far as to the Lady:
And yet to be afeard of my deserving,
Were but a weak disabling of my self.
As much as I deserve, why that is the Lady.
I do in birth deserve her, and in fortunes,
In graces, and in qualities of breeding:
But more then these, in love I do deserve.
What if I strai'd no farther, but chose here?
Let Us see once more this saying grau'd in gold.
Who chooses me shall gain what many men desire:
Why that is the Lady, all the world desires her:
From the four corners of the earth they come
To kiss this shrine, this mortal breathing Saint.
The Hircanion deserts, and the vaste wilds
Of wide Arabia are as through fares now
For Princes to come view fair Portia.
The waterie Kingdom, whose ambitious head
Spets in the face of heaven, is no bar
To stop the foreign spirits, but they come
As ore a brook to see fair Portia.
One of these three contains her heavenly picture.
Is It like that Lead contains her? 'twere damnation
To think so base a thought, it were too gross
To rib her searecloath in the obscure grave:
Or shall I think in Silver she is immured
Being ten times undervalued to tried gold;
O sinful thought, never so rich a Iem
Was set in worse then gold! They have in England
A coin that bears the figure of an Angel
Stamped in gold, but that is insculpt upon:
But here an Angel in a golden bed
Lies all within. Deliver me the key:
Here do I choose, and thrive I as I may.

There take it Prince, and if my form lie there
Then I am yours.

O hell! what have we here, a carrion death,
Within whose empty eye there is a written scroule;
I Will read the writing.
All that glisters is not gold,
Often have you heard that cold;
Many a man his life has sold
But my outside to behold;
Gilded timber do worms infold:
Had you been as wise as bold,
Young in limbs, in judgment old,
Your answer had not been inscrold,
Fare you well, your suite is cold,

Cold indeed, and labor lost,
Then farewell heat, and welcome frost:
Portia adieu, I have too grieved a heart
To take a tedious leave: thus loosers part.

A gentle riddance: draw the curtains, go:
Let all of his complexion choose me so.

Why man I saw Bassanio under sail,
With him is Gratiano gone along;
And in their ship I am sure Lorenzo is not.

The villain Jew with outcries raisd the Duke.
Who went with him to search Bassanios ship.

He comes too late, the ship was undersail;
But there the Duke was given to understand
That in a Gondilo were seen together
Lorenzo and his amorous Iessica.
Besides, Anthonio certified the Duke
They were not with Bassanio in his ship.

I never heard a passion so confusd,
So strange, outrageous, and so variable,
As the dog Jew did utter in the streets;
My daughter, O my ducats, O my daughter,
Fled with a Christian, O my Christian ducats!
Justice, the law, my ducats, and my daughter;
A sealed bag, two sealed bags of ducats,
Of double ducats, stolen from me by my daughter,
And jewels, two stones, two rich and precious stones,
Stolen by my daughter: justice, find the girl,
She has the stones upon her, and the ducats.

Why all the boys in Venice follow him,
Crying his stones, his daughter, and his ducats.

Let good Anthonio look he keep his day
Or he shall pay for this.

Marry well remembered,
I reasoned with a Frenchman yesterday,
Who told me, in the narrow seas that part
The French and English, there miscarried
A vessel of our country richly fraught:
I thought upon Anthonio when he told me,
And wished in silence that it were not his.

Yo were best to tell Anthonio what you hear.
Yet do not suddenly, for it may grieve him.

A kinder Gentleman treads not the earth,
I saw Bassanio and Anthonio part,
Bassanio told him he would make some speed
Of his return: he answered, do not so,
Slubber not business for my sake Bassanio,
But stay the very riping of the time,
And for the Jews bond which he has of me,
Let it not enter in your mind of love:
Be merry, and employ your chiefest thoughts
To courtship, and such fair ostents of love
As shall conveniently become you there;
And even there his eye being big with tears,
Turning his face, he put his hand behind him,
And with affection wondrous sencible
He wrung Bassanios hand, and so they parted.

I think he only loves the world for him,
I pray thee let us go and find him out
And quicken his embraced heaviness
With some delight or other.

Do we so.


Quick, quick I pray thee, draw the curtain strait,
The Prince of Arragon has taken his oath,
And comes to his election presently.

Behold, there stand the caskets noble Prince,
If you choose that wherein I am contained,
Straight shall our nuptial rights be solemnized:
But if thou fail, without more speech my Lord,
You must be gone from hence immediately.

I am enioynd by oath to observe three things;
First, never to unfold to any one
Which casket 'twas I chose; next, if I fail
Of the right casket, never in my life
To woo a maid in way of marriage:
Lastly, if I do fail in fortune of my choice,
Immediately to leave you, and be gone.

To these injunctions every one does swear
That comes to hazard for my worthless self.

And so have I addressed me, fortune now
To my hearts hope: gold, silver, and base lead.
Who chooses me must give and hazard all he has.
You shall look fairer ere I give or hazard.
What says the golden chest, ha, let me see:
Who chooses me, shall gain what many men desire:
What many men desire, that many may be meant
By the fool multitude that choose by show,
Not learning more then the fond eye does teach,
Which pries not to the interior, but like the Martlet
Builds in the weather on the outward wall,
Even in the force and rode of casualtie.
I will not choose what many men desire,
Because I will not iumpe with common spirits,
And rank me with the barbarous multitudes.
Why then to thee thou Silver treasure house,
Tell me once more, what title thou do bear;
Who chooses me shall get as much as he deserves:
And well said too; for who shall go about
To cosen Fortune, and be honorable
Without the stamp of merit, let none presume
To wear^ an undeserved dignity:
O that estates, degrees, and offices,
Were not deriu^d corruptly, and that clear honor
Were purchased by the merit of the wearer;
How many then should cover that stand bare?
How many be commanded that command?
How much low pleasantry would then be gleaned
From the true seed of honor? And how much honor
Picked from the chafe and ruin of the times,
To be new varnisht: Well, but to my choice.
Who chooses me shall get as much as he deserves.
I will assume desert; give me a key for this,
And instantly unlock my fortunes here.

Too long a pause for that which you find there.


What Is here, the portrait of a blinking idiot
Presenting me a scedule, I will read it:
How much unlike art thou to Portia?
How much unlike my hopes and my deseruings?
Who chooses me, shall have as much as he deserves.
Did I deserve no more then a fools head,
Is that my prize, are my deserts no better?

To offend and judge are distinct offices,
And of opposed natures.

What is here?

The fire seven times tried this,
Seven times tried that iudement is,
That did never choose amiss,
Some there be that shadows kiss,
Such have but a shadows bliss:
There be fools alive Iwis
Siluer'd over, and so was this:
Take what wife you will to bed,
I will ever be your head:
So be gone, you are sped.

Still more fool I shall appear
By the time I linger here,
With one fools head I came to woo,
But I go away with two.
Sweet adue, I Will keep my oath,
Patiently to bear my wroath.

Thus has the candle singed the moath:
O these deliberate fools when they do choose,
They have the wisdom by their wit to loose.

The ancient saying is no heresy,
Hanging and wiuing goes by destiny.

Come draw the curtain Nerrissa.


Where is my Lady?


Here, what would my Lord?


Madam, there is a-lighted at your gate
A young Venetian, one that comes before
To signify the approaching of his Lord,
From whom he brings sensible regreets;
To wit (besides commends and courteous breath)
Gifts of rich value; yet I have not seen
So likely an Ambassador of love.
A day in April never came so sweet
To show how costly Summer was at hand,
As this fore-spurrer comes before his Lord.

No more I pray thee, I am half a-feard
Thou will say anon he is some kin to thee,
Thou spend'st such high-day wit in praising him:
Come, come Nerryssa, for I long to see
Quick Cupids Post, that comes so mannerly.

Bassanio Lord, love if thy will it be.


Now, what news on the Ryalto?


Why yet it lives there unchecked, that Anthonio has a ship of rich lading
wrackt on the narrow Seas; the Goodwins I think they call the place, a very
dangerous flat, and fatal, where the carcasses of many a tall ship, lie
buried, as they say, if my gossips report be an honest woman of her word


I would she were as lying a gossip in that, as ever knapt Ginger, or made her
neighbors believe she wept for the death of a third husband: but it is true,
without any slips of prolixity, or crossing the plain highway of talk, that
the good Anthonio, the honest Anthonio; o that I had a title good enough to
keep his name company


Come, the full stop.


Ha, what say thou, why the end is, he has lost a ship.


I would it might prove the end of his losses.


Let me say Amen betimes, least the devil cross my prayer, for here he comes
in the iikenes of a Jew. How now Shylocke, what news among the Merchants


You knew none so well, none so well as you, of my daughters flight.


That Is certain, I for my part knew the Tailor that made the wings she flew
withal


And Shylocke for his own part knew the bird was fledged, and then it is the
complexion of them al to leave the dam


She is damned for it.


That Is certain, if the devil may be her Judge.


My own flesh and blood to rebel.


Out upon it old carrion, rebels it at these years.


I say my daughter is my flesh and blood.


There is more difference between thy flesh and hers, then between Iet and
Iuorie, more between your bloods, then there is between red wine and rennish:
but tell us, do you hear whether Anthonio have had any loss at sea or no


There I have another bad match, a bankrout, a prodigal, who dare scarce show
his head on the Ryalto, a beggar that was vsd to come so smug upon the Mart:
let him look to his bond, he was wont to call me Usurer, let him look to his
bond, he was wont to lend money for a Christian curtsie, let him look to his
bond


Why I am sure if he forfaite, thou will not take his flesh, what is that good
for


To bait fish withal, if it will feed nothing else, it will feed my
revenge; he has disgraced me, and hindered me half a million, laughed at my
losses, mocked at my gains, scorned my Nation, thwarted my bargains, cooled my
friends, heated mine enemies, and what is the reason? I am a Jew: Has not a
Jew eyes? has not a Jew hands, organs, dementions, senses, affections,
passions, fed with the same food, hurt with the same weapons, subject to the
same diseases, healed by the same means, warmed and cooled by the same Winter
and Sommmer as a Christian is: if you prick us do we not bleed? if you
tickle us, do we not laugh? if you poison us do we not die? and if you wrong
us shall we not revenge? if we are like you in the rest, we will resemble you
in that. If a Jew wrong a Christian, what is his humility, revenge? If a
Christian wrong a Jew, what should his sufferance be by Christian example, why
revenge? The villainy you teach me I will execute, and it shall go hard but I
will better the instruction

Gentlemen, my master Anthonio is at his house, and desires to speak with you
both


We have been up and down to seek him.


Here comes another of the Tribe, a third cannot be matched, unless the devil
himself turn Jew


How now Tuball, what news from Genowa? have thou found my daughter?


I often came where I did hear ofster, but cannot find her.


Why there, there, there, there, a diamond gone cost me two thousand ducats in
Franckford, the curse never fell upon our Nation till now, I never felt it till
now, two thousand ducats in that, and other precious, precious jewels: I would
my daughter were dead at my foot, and the jewels in her care: would she were
hearst at my foot, and the ducats in her coffin: no news of them, why so?
and I know not how much is spent in the search: why thou loss upon loss, the
thief gone with so much, and so much to find the thief, and no satisfaction,
no revenge, nor no ill luck stirring but what lights a my shoulders, no sighs
but a my breathing, no tears but a my shedding


Yes, other men have ill luck too, Anthonio as I heard in Genowa?


What, what, what, ill luck, ill luck.


Has an Argosie cast away coming from Tripolis.


I thank God, I thank God, is it true, is it true?


I spoke with some of the Sailors that escaped the wrack.


I thank thee good Tuball, good news, good news: ha, ha, here in Genowa.


Your daughter spent in Genowa, as I heard, one night fourscore ducats.


Thou stick'st a dagger in me, I shall never see my gold again, fourscore
ducats at asitting, fourscore ducats


There came diverse of Anthonios creditors in my company to Venice, that swear
he cannot choose but break


I am very glad of it, i will plague him, i will torture him, I am glad of it,


One of them showed me a ring that he had of your daughter for a Monkie.


Out upon her, thou torturest me Tuball, it was my Turkies, I had it of Leah
when I was a Batcheler: I would not have given it for a wilderness of Monkies


But Anthonio is certainly undone.


Nay, that is true, that is very true, go Tuball, fee me an Officer, bespeake
him a fortnight before, I will have the heart of him if he forfeit, for were he
out of Venice, I can make what merchandise I will: go Tuball, and meet me at
our Sinagogue, go good Tuball, at our Sinagogue Tuball


I pray you tarry, pause a day or two
Before you hazard, for in choosing wrong
I loose your company; therefore forbear a while,
There Is something tells me (but it is not love)
I would not loose you, and you know your self,
Hate counsels not in such a quallitie;
But least you should not understand me well,
And yet a maiden has no tongue, but thought,
I would detain you here some month or two
Before you venture for me. I could teach you
How to choose right, but then I am forsworn,
So will I never be, so may you miss me,
But if you do, you will make me wish a sin,
That I had been forsworn: Beshrow your eyes,
They have ore-lookt me and divided me,
One half of me is yours, the other half yours,
Mine own I would say: but of mine then yours,
And so all yours; O these naughty times
Puts bars between the owners and their rights.
And so though yours, not yours (prove it so)
Let Fortune go to hell for it, not I.
I speak too long, but it is to peize the time,
To ich it, and to draw it out in length,
To stay you from election.

Let me choose,
For as I am, I live upon the rack.

Upon the rack Bassanio, then confess
What treason there is mingled with your love.

None but that ugly treason of mistrust.
Which makes me fear the enjoying of my love:
There may as well be amity and life,
'Tweene snow and fire, as treason and my love*

I, but I fear you speak upon the rack,
Where men enforced does speak any thing.

Promise me life, and i will confess the truth.


Well then, confess and live.


Confess and love
Had been the very sum of my confession:
O happy torment, when my torturer
Does teach me answers for deliverance:
But let me to my fortune and the caskets.

Away then, I am locked in one of them,
If you do love me, you will find me out.
Nerryssa and the rest, stand all aloose,
Let music sound while he does make his choice,
Then if he loose he makes a Swan-like end,
Fading in music. That the comparison
May stand more proper, my eye shall be the stream
And watrie deathbed for him: he may win,
And what is music than? Than music is
Even as the flourish, when true subjects how
To a new crowned Monarch: Such it is,
As are those dulcet sounds in break of day,
That creep into the dreaming bride-groomes ear,
And summon him to marriage. Now he goes
With no less presence, but with much more love
Then young Alcides, when he did redeem
The virgin tribute, paid by howling Troy
To the Sea Monster: I stand for sacrifice,
The rest aloof are the Dardanian wives:
With bleared visages come forth to view
The issue of the exploit: Go Hercules,
Live thou, I live with much more dismay
I view the fight, then thou that make the fray.
Tell me where is fancy bred,
Or in the heart, or in the head:
How begot, how nourished.
Reply, reply.
It is engendered in the eyes,
With gazing fed, and Fancy dies,
In the cradle where it lies:
Let us all ring Fancies knell.
I Will begin it.
Ding, dong, bell.

Ding, dong, bell.

So may the outward shows be least themselves
The world is still deceived with ornament.
In Law, what Plea so tanted and corrupt,
But being seasoned with a gracious voice,
Obscures the show of evil? In Religion,
What damned error, but some sober brow
Will bless it, and approve it with a text,
Hiding the grosenesse with fair ornament:
There is no voice so simple, but assumes
Some mark of virtue on his outward parts;
How many cowards, whose hearts are all as false
As stayers of sand, wear yet upon their chins
The beards of Hercules and frowning Mars,
Who inward searched, have lyuers white as milk,
And these assume but valors excrement,
To render them redoubted. Look on beauty,
And you shall see it is purchased by the weight,
Which therein works a miracle in nature,
Making them lightest that wear most of it:
So are those crisped snakie golden locks
Which makes such wanton gambols with the wind
Upon supposed fairness, often known
To be the dowry of a second head,
The scull that bred them in the Sepulcher.
Thus ornament is but the guiled shore
To a most dangerous sea: the beauteous scarf
Vailing an Indian beauty; In a word,
The seeming truth which cunning times put on
To entrap the wisest. Therefore then thou gaudie gold,
Hard food for Midas, I will none of thee,
Nor none of thee thou pale and common drudge
'Tweene man and man: but thou, thou meager lead
Which rather threatnest then do promise ought,
Thy palenesse moves me more then eloquence,
And here choose I, joy be the consequence.

How all the other passions fleet to air,
As doubtful thoughts, and rash embraced despair:
And shuddring fear, and greene-eyed jealousy.
O love be moderate, allay thy ecstasy,
In measure rain thy joy, scant this excess,
I feel too much thy blessing, make it less,
For fear I surfeit.

What find I here?
Fair Portias counterfeit. What demie God
Has come so near creation? move these eyes?
Or whether riding on the bals of mine
Seem they in motion? Here are seuer'd lips
Parted with sugar breath, so sweet a bar
Should sunder such sweet friends: here in her hairs
The Painter plays the Spider, and has wouen
A golden mesh to entrap the hearts of men
Faster then gnats in cobwebs: but her eyes,
How could he see to do them? having made one,
Me thinks it should have power to steal both his
And leave it self unfurnished: Yet look how far
The substance of my praise does wrong this shadow
In vnderprising it, so far this shadow
Does limpe behind the substance. Here Is the scroule,
The continent, and summarie of my fortune.
You that choose not by the view
Chance as fair, and choose as true:
Since this fortune falls to you,
Be content, and seek no new.
If you be well pleased with this,
And hold your fortune for your bliss,
Turn you where your Lady is,
And claim her with a loving kiss.

A gentle scroule: Fair Lady, by your leave,
I come by note to give, and to receive,
Like one of two contending in a prize
That thinks he has done well in peoples eyes:
Hearing applause and universal shout,
Giddie in spirit, still gazing in a doubt
Whether those peales of praise be his or no.
So thrice fair Lady stand I even so,
As doubtful whether what I see be true,
Until confirmed, signed, ratified by you.

You see my Lord Bassiano where I stand,
Such as I am; though for my self alone
I would not be ambitious in my wish,
To wish my self much better, yet for you,
I would be trebled twenty times my self,
A thousand times more fair, ten thousand times
More rich, that only to stand high in your account,
I might in virtues, beauties, livings, friends,
Exceed account: but the full sum of me
Is sum of nothing: which to term in gross,
Is an vnlessoned girl, vnschool'd, vnpractiz'd,
Happy in this, she is not yet so old
But she may learn: happier then this,
She is not bred so dull but she can learn;
Happiest of all, is that her gentle spirit
Commits it self to yours to be directed,
As from her Lord, her Governor, her King.
My self, and what is mine, to you and yours
Is now converted. But now I was the Lord
Of this fair mansion, master of my servants,
Queen ore my self: and even now, but now,
This house, these servants, and this same my self
Are yours, my Lord, I give them with this ring,
Which when you part from, loose, or give away,
Let it presage the ruin of your love,
And be my vantage to exclaim on you.

Maddam, you have bereft me of all words,
Only my blood speaks to you in my veins,
And there is such confusion in my powers,
As after some oration fairly spoke
By a beloved Prince, there does appear
Among the buzzing pleased multitude,
Where every something being blent together,
Turns to a wild of nothing, save of joy
Expressed, and not expressed: but when this ring
Parts from this finger, then parts life from hence,
O then be bold to say Bassanio's dead.

My Lord and Lady, it is now our time
That have stood by and seen our wishes prosper,
To cry good joy, good joy my Lord and Lady.

My Lord Bassanio, and my gentle Lady,
I wish you all the joy that you can wish:
For I am sure you can wish none from me:
And when your Honors mean to solemnize
The bargain of your faith: I do beseech you
Even at that time I may be married too.

With all my heart, so thou can get a wife.


I thank your Lordship, you gave got me one.
My eyes my Lord can look as swift as yours:
You saw the mistres, I beheld the maid:
You loved, I loved for intermission,
No more pertaines to me my Lord then you;
Your fortune stood upon the caskets there,
And so did mine too, as the matter falls:
For wooing here until I fwet again,
And swearing till my very rough was dry
With oaths of love, at last, if promise last,
I got a promise of this fair one here
To have her love: provided that your fortune
Atchieu'd her mistress.

Is this true Nerrissa?


Madam it is so, so you stand pleased withal.


And do you Gratiano mean good faith?


Yes faith my Lord.


Our feast shall be much honored in your marriage.


We Will play with them the first boy for a thousand ducats.


What and stake down?


No, we shall nere win at that sport, and stake down.
But who comes here? Lorenzo and his Infidel?
What and my old Venetian friend Salerio?

Lorenzo and Salerio, welcome hither,
If that the youth of my new interest here
Have power to bid you welcome: by your leave
I bid my very friends and Countrymen
Sweet Portia welcome.

So do I my Lord, they are entirely welcome.


I thank your honor; for my part my Lord,
My purpose was not to have seen you here,
But meeting with Salerio by the way,
He did entreat me past all saying nay
To come with him along.

I did my Lord,
And I have reason for it, Signior Anthonio
Commends him to you.

Ere I open his Letter
I pray you tell me how my good friend does.

Not sick my Lord, unless it be in mind,
Nor well, unless in mind: his Letter there
Will show you his estate.

Nerrissa, cheer yond stranger, bid her welcome.
Your hand Salerio, what is the news from Venice?
How does that royal Merchant good Anthonio;
I know he vvil be glad of our success,
We are the Iasons, we have won the fleece.

I would you had vvon the fleece that he has lost.


There are some shrewd contents in yond same Paper,
That steals the color from Bassianos cheek,
Some dear friend dead, else nothing in the world
Could turn so much the constitution
Of any constant man. What, worse and worse?
With leave Bassanio I am half your self,
And I must freely have the half of any thing
That this same paper brings you.

O sweet Portia,
Here are a few of the vnpleasant'st words
That ever blotted paper. Gentle Lady
When I did first impart my love to you,
I freely told you all the wealth I had
Ran in my veins: I was a Gentleman,
And then I told you true: and yet dear Lady,
Rating my self at nothing, you shall see
How much I was a Braggart, when I told you
My state was nothing, I should then have told you
That I was worse then nothing: for indeed
I have engaged my self to a dear friend,
Engaged my friend to his mere enemy
To feed my means. Here is a Letter Lady,
The paper as the body of my friend,
And every word in it a gaping wound
Issuing life blood. But is it true Salerio,
Has all his ventures faild, what not one hit,
From Tripolis, from Mexico and England,
From Lisbon, Barbary, and India,
And not one vessel escape the dreadful touch
Of Merchant-marring rocks?

Not one my Lord.
Besides, it should appear, that if he had
The present money to discharge the Jew,
He would not take it: never did I know
A creature that did bear the shape of man
So keen and greedy to confound a man.
He plyes the Duke at morning and at night,
And does impeach the freedom of the state
If they deny him justice. Twenty Merchants,
The Duke himself, and the Magnificoes
Of greatest port have all persuaded with him,
But none can drive him from the envious plea
Of forfeiture, of justice, and his bond.

When I was with him, I have heard him swear
To Tuball and to Chus, his Countri-men,
That he would rather have Anthonio's flesh,
Then twenty times the value of the sum
That he did owe him: and I know my Lord,
If law, authority, and power deny not,
It will go hard with poor Anthonio.

Is it your dear friend that is thus in trouble?


The dearest friend to me, the kindest man,
The best conditioned, and unwearied spirit
In doing courtesies: and one in whom
The ancient Roman honor more appears
Then any that draws breath in Italy.

What sum owes he the Jew?


For me three thousand ducats.


What, no more?
Pay him six thousand, and deface the bond:
Double six thousand, and then treble that,
Before a friend of this description
Shall lose a hair through Bassano's fault.
First go with me to Church, and call me wife,
And then away to Venice to your friend:
For never shall you lie by Portias side
With an unquiet soul. You shall have gold
To pay the petty debt twenty times over.
When it is paid, bring your true friend along,
My maid Nerrissa, and my self mean time
Will live as maids and widows; come away,
For you shall hence upon your wedding day:
Bid your friends welcome, show a merry cheer,
Since you are dear bought, I will love you dear.
But let me hear the letter of your friend.
Sweet Bassanio, my ships have all miscarried, my Creditors grow cruel, my
estate is very low, my bond to the Jew is forfeit, and since in paying it, it
is impossible I should live, all debts are cleerd between you and I, if I
might see you at my death: notwithstanding, use your pleasure, if your love do
not persuade you to come, let not my letter.
O love! dispach all business and be gone.


Since I have your good leave to go away,
I will make have; but till I come again,
No bed shall ere be guilty of my stay,
Nor rest be interpos^r twixt us twain.

Iaylor, look to him, tell not me of mercy,
This is the fool that lends out money gratis.
Iaylor, look to him.

Hear me yet good Shylok.


I Will have my bond, speak not against my bond,
I have sworn an oath that I will have my bond:
Thou call'dst me dog before thou had a cause,
But since I am a dog, beware my phangs,
The Duke shall grant me justice, I do wonder
Thou naughty Iaylor, that thou art so fond
To come abroad with him at his request.

I pray thee hear me speak.


I Will have my bond, I will not hear thee speak,
I Will have my bond, and therefore speak no more.
I Will not be made a soft and dull eyed fool,
To shake the head, relent, and sigh, and yield
To Christian intercessors: follow not,
I Will have no speaking, I will have my bond.

It is the most impenetrable curre
That ever kept with men.

Let him alone,
I Will follow him no more with bootlesse prayers:
He seeks my life, his reason well I know;
I often delivered from his forfeitures
Many that have at times made moan to me,
Therefore he hates me.

I am sure the Duke will never grant this forfeiture to hold.


The Duke cannot deny the course of law:
For the commodity that strangers have
With us in Venice, if it be denied,
Will much impeach the justice of the State,
Since that the trade and profit of the city
Consists of all Nations. Therefore go,
These greefes and losses have so bated me,
That I shall hardly spare a pound of flesh
To morrow, to my bloody Creditor.
Well Iaylor, on, pray God Bassanio come
To see me pay his debt, and then I care not.

Madam, although I speak it in your presence,
You have a noble and a true conceit
Of god-like amity, which appears most strongly
In bearing thus the absence of your Lord.
But if you knew to whom you show this honor,
How true a Gentleman you send relief,
How dear a lover of my Lord your husband,
I know you would be prouder of the work
Then customary bounty can enforce you.

I never did repent for doing good,
Nor shall not now: for in companions
That do converse and waste the time together,
Whose souls do bear an egal yoke of love,
There must be needs a like proportion
Of lyniaments, of manners, and of spirit;
Which makes me think that this Anthonio
Being the bosom lover of my Lord,
Must needs be like my Lord. If it be so,
How little is the cost I have bestowed
In purchasing the semblance of my soul;
From out the state of hellish cruelty,
This comes too near the praising of my self,
Therefore no more of it: here other things
Lorenso I commit into your hands,
The husbandry and manage of my house,
Until my Lords return; for mine own part
I have toward heaven breathed a secret vow,
To live in prayer and contemplation,
Only attended by Nerrissa here,
Until her husband and my Lords return:
There is a monastery too miles often,
And there we will abide. I do desire you
Not to deny this imposition,
The which my love and some necessity
Now lays upon you.

Madame, with all my heart,
I shall obey you in all fair commands.

My people do already know my mind,
And will acknowledge you and Iessica
In place of Lord Bassanio and my self.
So far you well till we shall meet again.

Fair thoughts and happy hours attend on you.


I wish your Ladyship all hearts content.


I thank you for your wish, and am well pleased
To wish it back on you: faryouwell Iessica.
Now Balthaser, as I have ever found thee honest true,
So let me find thee still: take this same letter,
And use thou all the indeauor of a man,
In speed to Mantua, see thou render this
Into my cosins hand, Doctor Belari^,
And look what notes and garments he does give thee,
Bring them I pray thee with imagined speed
Unto the Tranect, to the common Ferrie
Which trades to Venice; waste no time in words,
But get thee gone, I shall be there before thee.

Madam, I go with all convenient speed.


Come on Nerissa, I have work in hand
That you yet know not of; we will see our husbands
Before they think of us?

Shall they see us?


They shall Nerrissa: but in such a habit,
That they shall think we are accomplished
With that we lack; I Will hold thee any wager
When we are both accoutered like young men,
I Will prove the prettier fellow of the two,
And wear my dagger with the brauer grace,
And speak between the change of man and boy,
With a reed voice, and turn two minsing steps
Into a manly stride; and speak of frayes
Like a fine bragging youth: and tell quaint lies
How honorable Ladies sought my love,
Which I denying, they fell sick and died.
I could not do withal: then I Will repent,
And wish for all that, that I had not killed them;
And twenty of these punie lies I Will tell,
That men shall swear I have discontinued school
Above a twelve month: I have within my mind
A thousand raw tricks of these bragging Iacks,
Which I will practice.

Why, shall we turn to men?


Fie, what a questions that?
If thou were nere a lewd interpreter:
But come, I Will tell thee all my whole device
When I am in my coach, which stays for us
At the Park gate; and therefore haste away,
For we must measure twenty miles to day.

Yes truly; for look you, the sins of the Father are to be laid upon the
children, therefore I promise you, I fear you, I was always plain with you,
and so now I speak my agitation of the matter: therefore be of good cheer, for
truly I think you are damned, there is but one hope in it that can do you
any good, and that is but a kind of bastard hope neither


And what hope is that I pray thee?


Marry you may partly hope that your father got you not, that you are not the
Jews daughter


That were a kind of bastard hope indeed, so the sins of my mother should be
visited upon me


Truly then I fear you are damned both by father and mother: thus when I shun
Scilla your father, I fall into Charibdis your mother; well, you are gone both
ways


I shall be saved by my husband, he has made me a Christian.


Truly the more to blame he, we were Christians enough before, e^ne as many as
could well live one by another: this making of Christians will raise the price
of Hogs, if we grow all to be porke-eaters, we shall not shortly have a
rasher on the coals for money


I Will tell my husband Lancelet what you say, here he comes.


I shall grow jealous of you shortly Lancelet, if you thus get my wife into
corners


Nay, you need not fear us Lorenzo, Launcelet and I are out, he tells me
flatly there is no mercy for me in heaven, because I am a Jews daughter: and
he says you are no good member of the common wealth, for in converting Jews
to Christians, you raise the price of Porke


I shall answer that better to the Commonwealth, than you can the getting up
of the Negroes belly: the Moore is with child by you Launcelet


It is much that the Moore should be more then reason: but if she be less then
an honest woman, she is indeed more then I took her for


How every fool can play upon the word, I think the best grace of wit will
shortly turn into silence, and discourse grow commendable in none only but
Parrats: go in sir, bid them prepare for dinner


That is done sir, they have all stomachs?


Goodly Lord, what a witte-snapper are you, then bid them prepare dinner.


That is done to sir, only cover is the word.


Will you cover than sir?


Not so sir neither, I know my duty.


Yet more quarrellng with occasion, will thou show the whole wealth of thy wit
in an instant; I pray thee understand a plain man in his plain meaning: go
to thy fellows, bid them cover the table, serve in the meat, and we will come
in to dinner


For the table sir, it shall be served in, for the meat sir, it shall be
covered, for your coming in to dinner sir, why let it be as humors and
conceits shall govern


O dear discretion, how his words are suited,
The fool has planted in his memory
An Army of good words, and I do know
A many fools that stand in better place,
Garnisht like him, that for a tricksie word
Defy the matter: how cheer'st thou Iessica,
And now good sweet say thy opinion,
How do thou like the Lord Bassiano's wife?

Past all expressing, it is very meet
The Lord Bassanio live an upright life
For having such a blessing in his Lady,
He finds the joys of heaven here on earth,
And if on earth he do not mean it, it
Is reason he should never come to heaven?
Why, if two gods should play some heavenly match,
And on the wager lay two earthly women,
And Portia one: there must be something else
Paund with the other, for the poor rude world
Has not her fellow.

Even such a husband
Have thou of me, as she is for a wife.

Nay, but ask my opinion to of that?


I will anon, first let us go to dinner?


Nay, let me praise you while I have a stomach?


No pray thee, let it serve for table talk,
Then how some ere thou speakst among other things,
I shall digest it?

Well, I Will set you forth.


What, is Anthonio here?


Ready, so please your grace?


I am sorry for thee, thou art come to answer
A stony adversary, an inhumane wretch,
Incapable of pity, void, and empty
From any dram of mercy.

I have heard
Your Grace has taken great pains to qualify
His rigorous course: but since he stands obdurate,
And that no lawful means can carry me
Out of his enuies reach, I do oppose
My patience to his fury, and am armed
To suffer with a quietness of spirit,
The very tyranny and rage of his.

Go one and call the Jew into the Court.


He is ready at the door, he comes my Lord.


Make room, and let him stand before our face.
Shylocke the world thinks, and I think so to
That thou but leadest this fashion of thy malice
To the last hour of act, and then it is thought
Thou Wilt show thy mercy and remorse more strange.
Than is thy strange apparent cruelty;
And where thou now exact'st the penalty,
Which is a pound of this poor Merchants flesh,
Thou will not only loose the forfeiture,
But touched with humane gentleness and love:
Forgive a moytie of the principal,
Glancing an eye of pity on his losses
That have of late so hudled on his back,
Enough to press a royal Merchant down;
And pluck commiseration of his state
From brassie bosoms, and rough hearts of flints,
From stubborn Turks and Tarters never traind
To offices of tender courtesy,
We all expect a gentle answer Jew?

I have possessed your grace of what I purpose,
And by our holy Sabbath have I sworn
To have the due and forfeit of my bond.
If you deny it, let the danger light
Upon your Charter, and your Cities freedom.
You Will ask me why I rather choose to have
A weight of carrion flesh, then to receive
Three thousand Ducats? I Will not answer that:
But say it is my humor; Is it answered?
What if my house be troubled with a Rat,
And I be pleased to give ten thousand Ducates
To have it bain'd? What, are you answered yet?
Some men there are love not a gaping Pigge:
Some that are mad, if they behold a Cat:
And others, when the bag-pipe sings in th nose,
Cannot contain their Urine for affection.
Masters of passion swayes it to the mood
Of what it likes or loathes, now for your answer:
As there is no firm reason to be rendered
Why he cannot abide a gaping Pigge?
Why he a harmless necessary Cat?
Why he a woollen bag-pipe: but of force
Must yield to such inevitable shame,
As to offend himself being offended:
So can I give no reason, nor I will not,
More then a lodged hate, and a certain loathing
I bear Anthonio, that I follow thus
A loosing suite against him? Are you answered?

This is no answer thou unfeeling man,
To excuse the current of thy cruelty.

I am not bound to please thee with my answer.


Do all men kill the things they do not love?


Hates any man the thing he would not kill?


Every offense is not a hate at first.


What would thou have a Serpent sting thee twice?


I pray you think you question with the Jew:
You may as well go stand upon the beach,
And bid the maine flood bait his usual height,
Or even as well use question with the Wolf,
The Ewe bleate for the Lamb:
You may as well forbid the Mountain Pines
To wagge their high tops, and to make no noise
When they are fretted with the gusts of heaven:
You may as well do any thing most hard,
As seek to soften that, then which what harder?
His Jewish heart. Therefore I do beseech you
Make no more offers, use no farther means,
But with all brief and plain conueniencie
Let me have judgment, and the Jew his will.

For thy three thousand Ducates heereis six.


If every Ducat in six thousand Ducates
Were in six parts, and every part a Ducate,
I would not draw them, I would have my bond?

How shall thou hope for mercy, rendering none?


What judgment shall I dread doing no wrong?
You have among you many a purchased slave,
Which like your Asses, and your Dogs and Mules,
You use in abject and in slavish parts,
Because you bought them. Shall I say to you,
Let them be free, marry them to your heirs?
Why sweat they under burdens? Let their beds
Be made as soft as yours: and let their pallats
Be seasoned with such Viands: you will answer
The slaves are ours. So do I answer you.
The pound of flesh which I demand of him
Is dearly bought, it is mine, and I will have it.
If you deny me; fie upon your Law,
There is no force in the decrees of Venice;
I stand for judgment, answer, Shall I have it?

Upon my power I may dismiss this Court,
Unless Bellario a learned Doctor,
Whom I have sent for to determine this,
Come here to day.

My Lord, here stays without
A Messenger with Letters from the Doctor,
New come from Padua.

Bring us the Letters, Call the Messengers.


Good cheer Anthonio. What man, courage yet:
The Jew shall have my flesh, blood, bones, and all,
Ere thou shall loose for me one drop of blood.

I am a tainted Weather of the flock,
Meetest for death, the weakest kind of fruit
Drops earliest to the ground, and so let me;
You cannot better be employed Bassanio,
Then to live still, and write mine Epitaph.

Came you from Padua from Bellario?


From both.
My Lord Bellario greets your Grace.

Why do thou whet thy knife so earnestly?


To cut the forfeiture from that bankrout there.


Not on thy soale: but on thy soul harsh Jew
Thou make thy knife keen: but no metal can,
No, not the hangmans Axe bear half the keenness
Of thy sharp envy. Can no prayers pierce thee?

No, none that thou have wit enough to make.


O be thou damned, inexecrable dog,
And for thy life let justice be accused:
Thou almost make me waver in my faith;
To hold opinion with Pythagoras,
That souls of Animals infuse themselves
Into the trunkes of men. Thy currish spirit
Governed a Wolf, who hanged for humane slaughter,
Even from the gallows did his fell soul fleet;
And whilst thou layest in thy unhallowed dam,
Infused it self in thee: For thy desires
Are Woluish, bloody, steru'd, and ravenous.

Till thou can rail the seal from off my bond
Thou but offend'st thy Lungs to speak so loud:
Repair thy wit good youth, or it will fall
To endless ruin. I stand here for Law.

This Letter from Bellario does commend
A young and Learned Doctor in our Court;
Where is he?

He attends here hard by
To know your answer, whether you will admit him.

With all my heart. Some three or four of you
Go give him courteous conduct to this place,
Mean time the Court shall hear Bellarioes Letter.
YOur Grace shall understand, that at the receive of your Letter I am very
sick: but in the instant that your messenger came, in loving visitation, was
with me a young Doctor of Rome, his name is Balthas^n: I acquained him with the
cause in Controversy, between the Jew and Anthonio the Merchant: We turned
ore many Books together: he is furnished with my opinion, which (...) ^ed
with his own learning, the greatness whereof I cannot enough command comes
with him at my importunity, to fill up your Graces request in my sted. I
beseech you, let his lack of years be no impediment to let him lack a
reverend estimation: for I never knew so young a body, with so old a head. I
leave him to your gracious acceptance, whose trial shall better publish his
commendation.
You hear the learned Bellario what he writes,
And here (I take it) is the Doctor come.
Give me your hand: Came you from old Bellario?

I did my Lord.


You are welcome: take your place;
Are you acquainted with the difference
That holds this present question in the Court.

I am informed thoroughly of the cause.
Which is the Merchant here? and which the Jew?

Anthonio and old Shylocke, both stand forth.


Is your name Shylocke?


Shylocke is my name.


Of a strange nature is the suit you follow,
Yet in such rule, that the Venetian Law
Cannot impugn you as you do proceed.
You stand within his danger, do you not?

I, so he says.


Do you confess the bond?


I do.


Then must the Jew be merciful.


On what compulsion must I? Tell me that.


The quality of mercy is not strained,
It droppeth as the gentle rain from heaven
Upon the place beneath. It is twice blessed,
It blesses him that gives, and him that takes,
It Is mightiest in the mightiest, it becomes
The throned Monarch better then his Crown.
His Scepter shows the force of temporal power,
The attribute to awe and Majesty,
Wherein does sit the dread and fear of Kings:
But mercy is above this sceptred sway,
It is enthroned in the hearts of Kings,
It is an attribute to God himself;
And earthly power does then show likest Gods
When mercy seasons Justice. Therefore Jew,
Though Justice be thy plea, consider this,
That in the course of Justice, none of us
Should see salvation: we do pray for mercy,
And that same prayer, does teach us all to render
The deeds of mercy. I have spoke thus much
To mittigate the justice of thy plea:
Which if thou follow, this strict course of Venice
Must needs give sentence against the Merchant there.

My deeds upon my head, I crave the Law,
The penalty and forfeite of my bond.

Is he not able to discharge the money?


Yes, here I tender it for him in the Court,
Yea, twice the sum, if that will not suffice,
I will be bound to pay it ten times ore,
On forfeit of my hands, my head, my heart:
If this will not suffice, it must appear
That malice bears down truth. And I beseech you
Wrest once the Law to your authority.
To do a great right, do a little wrong,
And curb this cruel devil of his will.

It must not be, there is no power in Venice
Can alter a decree established:
'Twill be recorded for a President,
And many an error by the same example,
Will rush into the state: It cannot be.

A Daniel come to judgment, yea a Daniel.
O wise young Judge, how do I honor thee.

I pray you let me look upon the bond.


Here it is most reverend Doctor, here it is.


Shylocke, there is thrice thy money offered thee.


An oath, an oath, I have an oath in heaven:
Shall I lay perjury upon my soul?
No not for Venice.

Why this bond is forfeit,
And lawfully by this the Jew may claim
A pound of flesh, to be by him cut off
Nearest the Merchants heart; be merciful,
Take thrice thy money, bid me tear the bond.

When it is paid according to the tenure.
It does appear you are a worthy Judge:
you know the Law, your exposition
Has been most sound. I charge you by the Law,
Whereof you are a well-deseruing pillar,
Proceed to judgment: By my soul I swear,
There is no power in the tongue of man
To alter me: I stay here on my bond.

Most heartily I do beseech the Court
To give the judgment.

Why then thus it is: you must prepare your bosom for his knife.


O noble Judge, O excellent young man.


For the intent and purpose of the Law
Has full relation to the penalty,
Which here appears due upon the bond.

It Is very true: O wise and upright Judge,
How much more elder art thou then thy looks?

Therefore lay bare your bosom.


I, his breast,
So says the bond, does it not noble Judge?
Nearest his heart, those are the very words.

It is so: Are there balance here to weigh the flesh?


I have them ready.


Have by some Surgeon Shylock on your charge
To stop his wounds, least he should bleed to death.

It is not nominated in the bond?


It is not so expressed: but what of that?
'Twere good you do so much for charity.

I cannot find it, it is not in the bond.


Come Merchant, have you any thing to say?


But little: I am armed and well prepared.
Give me your hand Bassanio, fare you well.
Grieve not that I am fallen to this for you:
For herein fortune shows her self more kind
Then is her custom. It is still her use
To let the wretched man out-liue his wealth,
To view with hollow eye, and wrinkled brow
An age of poverty. From which lingering penance
Of such misery, does she cut me off:
Commend me to your honorable Wife,
Tell her the process of Anthonio's end:
Say how I loved you; speak me fair in death:
And when the tale is told, bid her be judge,
Whether Bassanio had not once a Love:
Repent not you that you shall loose your friend,
And he repents not that he pays your debt.
For if the Jew do cut but deep enough,
I Will pay it instantly, with all my heart.

Anthonio, I am married to a wife,
Which is as dear to me as life it self,
But life it self, my wife, and all the world,
Are not with me esteemed above thy life.
I would loose all, I sacrifice them all
Here to this devil, to deliver you.

Your wife would give you little thanks for that
If she were by to hear you make the offer.

I have a wife whom I protest I love,
I would she were in heaven, so she could
Entreat some power to change this currish Jew.

It Is well you offer it behind her back,
The wish would make else an unquiet house.

These be the Christian husbands: I have a daughter
Would any of the stock of Barrabas
Had been her husband, rather then a Christian.
We trifle time, I pray thee pursue sentence.

A pound of that same merchants flesh is thine,
The Court awards it, and the law does give it.

Most rightful Judge.


And you must cut this flesh from off his breast,
The Law allows it, and the Court awards it.

Most learned Judge, a sentence, come prepare.


Tarry a little, there is something else,
This bond does give thee here no jot of blood,
The words expressly are a pound of flesh:
Then take thy bond, take thou thy pound of flesh,
But in the cutting it, if thou do shed
One drop of Christian blood, thy lands and goods
Are by the Laws of Venice confiscate
Unto the state of Venice.

O upright Judge,
Mark Jew, o learned Judge.

Is that the law?


Thy self shall see the Act:
For as thou vrgest justice, be assured
Thou shall have justice more then thou desire.

O learned Judge, mark Jew, a learned Judge.


I take this offer then, pay the bond thrice,
And let the Christian go.

Here is the money.


Soft, the Jew shall have all justice, soft, no haste,
He shall have nothing but the penalty.

O Jew, an upright Judge, a learned Judge.


Therefore prepare thee to cut off the flesh,
Shed thou no blood, nor cut thou less nor more
But just a pound of flesh: if thou take more
Or less then a just pound, be it so much
As makes it light or heavy in the substance,
Or the division of the twentieth part
Of one poor scruple, nay if the scale do turn
But in the estimation of a hair,
Thou die, and all thy goods are confiscate.

A second Daniel, a Daniel Jew,
Now infidel I have thee on the hip.

Why does the Jew pause, take thy forfeiture.


Give me my principal, and let me go.


I have it ready for thee, here it is.


He has refused, it in the open Court,
He shall have merely justice and his bond.

A Daniel still say I, a second Daniel,
I thank thee Jew for teaching me that word.

Shall I not have barely my principal?


Thou shall have nothihg but the forfeiture,
To be taken so at thy peril Jew.

Why then the Devil give him good of it:
I Will stay no longer question.

Tarry Jew,
The Law has yet another hold on you.
It is enacted in the Laws of Venice,
If it be proved against an Alien,
That by direct, or indirect attempts
He seek the life of any Citizen,
The party against the which he does contriue,
Shall seize one half his goods, the other half
Comes to the privy coffer of the State,
And the offenders life lies in the mercy
Of the Duke only, against all other voice.
In which predicament I say thou standst:
For it appears by manifest proceeding,
That indirectly, and directly to,
Thou have contrived against the very life
Of the defendant: and thou have incurred
The danger formerly by me rehearst.
Down therefore, and beg mercy of the Duke.

Beg that thou may have leave to hang thy self,
And yet thy wealth being forfeit to the state,
Thou have not left the value of a cord,
Therefore thou must be hanged at the slates charge.

That thou shall see the difference of our spirit,
I pardon thee thy life before thou ask it:
For half thy wealth, it is Anthonio's,
The other half comes to the general state,
Which humbleness may drive unto a fine.

I for the state, not for Anthonio.


Nay, take my life and all, pardon not that,
You take my house, when you do take the prop
That does sustain my house: you take my life
When you do take the means whereby I live.

What mercy can you render him Anthonio?


A halter gratis, nothing else for Gods sake.


So please my Lord the Duke, and all the Court
To quit the fine for one half of his goods,
I am content: so he will let me have
The other half in use, to render it
Upon his death, unto the Gentleman
That lately stole his daughter.
Two things provided more, that for this favor
He presently become a Christian:
The other, that he do record a gift
Here in the Court of all he dies possessed
Unto his son Lorenzo, and his daughter.

He shall do this, or else I do recant
The pardon that I late pronounced here.

Art thou contented Jew? what do thou say?


I am content.


Clarke, draw a deed of gift.


I pray you give me leave to go from hence,
I am not well, send the deed after me,
And I will sign it.

Get thee gone, but do it.


In christning thou shall have two godfathers,
Had I been judge, thou should have had ten more,
To bring thee to the gallows, not to the font.

Sir I entreat you with me home to dinner.


I humbly do desire your Grace of pardon,
I must away this night toward Padua,
And it is mere I presently set forth.

I am sorry that your leisure serves you not:
Anthonio, gratify this gentlemen,
For in my mind, you are much bound to him.

Most worthy gentlemen, I and my friend
Have by your wisdom been this day acquitted
Of grievous penalties, in lie ^ whereof,
Three thousand Ducats due unto the Jew
We freely cope your courteous pains withal.

And stand indebted over and above
In love and service to you evermore.

He is well paid that is well satisfied,
And I delivering you, am satisfied,
And therein do account my self well paid,
My mind was never yet more mercinarie.
I pray you know me when we meet again,
I wish you well, and so I take my leave.

Dear sir, of force I must attempt you further,
Take some remembrance of us as a tribute,
Not as fee: grant me two things, I pray you
Not to deny me, and to pardon me.

You press me far, and therefore I will yield,
Give me your gloves, I Will wear them for your sake,
And for your love I Will take this ring from you,
Do not draw back your hand, i will take no more,
And you in love shall not deny me this?

This ring good sir, alas it is a trifle,
I will not shame my self to give you this.

I will have nothing else but only this,
And now methinkes I have a mind to it.

There Is more depends on this then on the value,
The dearest ring in Venice will I give you,
And find it out by proclamation,
Only for this I pray you pardon me.

I see sir you are liberal in offers,
You taught me first to beg, and now me thinks
You teach me how a beggar should be answered.

Good sir, this ring was given me by my wife,
And when she put it on, she made me vow
That I should neither soll, nor give, nor lose it.

That scuse serves many men to save their gifts,
And if your wife be not a mad woman,
And know how well I have deserved this ring,
She would not hold out enemy for ever
For giving it to me: well, peace be with you.

My L. Bassanio, let him have the ring,
Let his deseruings and my love withal
Be valued against your wives commandment.

Go Gratiano, run and ouer-take him,
Give him the ring, and bring him if thou can
Unto Anthonios house, away, make haste.
Come, you and I will thither presently,
And in the morning early will we both
Fly toward Belmont, come Anthonio.

Enquire the Jews house out, give him this deed,
And let him sign it, we will away to night,
And be a day before our husbands home:
This deed will be well welcome to Lorenzo.

Fair sir, you are well ore-tane:
My L. Bassanio upon more advice,
Has sent you here this ring, and does entreat
Your company at dinner.

That cannot be;
His ring I do accept most thankfully,
And so I pray you tell him: furthermore,
I pray you show my youth old Shylockes house.

That will I do.


Sir, I would speak with you:
I Will see if I can get my husbands ring
Which I did make him swear to keep for ever.

Thou may I warrant, we shall have old swearing
That they did give the rings away to men;
But we will outface them, and out-sweare them to:
Away, make haste, thou know where I will tarry.

Come good sir, will you show me to this house.


The moon shines bright. In such a night as this,
When the sweet wind did gently kiss the trees,
And they did make no nuyse, in such a night
Troylus me thinks mounted the Trojan walls,
And sighed his soul toward the Grecian tents
Where Cressed lay that night.

In such a night
Did Thisbie fearfully ore-trip the dew,
And saw the Lions shadow ere himself,
And ran dismayed away.

In such a night
Stood Dido with a Willow in her hand
Upon the wild sea banks, and waft her Love
To come again to Carthage.

In such a night
Medea gathered the enchanted herbs
That did renew old Eson.

In such a night
Did Iessica steal from the wealthy Jew,
And with an Unthrift Love did run from Venice,
As far as Belmont.

In such a night
Did young Lorenzo swear he loved her well,
Stealing her soul with many vows of faith,
And nere a true one.

In such a night
Did pretty Iessica (like a little shrow)
Slander her Love, and he forgave it her.

I would out-night you did no body come:
But hark, I hear the footing of a man.

Who comes so fast in silence of the night?


A friend.


A friend, what friend? your name I pray you friend?


Stephano is my name, and I bring word
My Mistress will before the break of day
Be here at Belmont, she does stray about
By holy crosses where she kneeles and prays
For happy wedlock hours.

Who comes with her?


None but a holy Hermit and her maid:
I pray you it my Master yet rnturn'd?

He is not, nor we have not heard from him,
But go we in I pray thee Iessica,
And ceremoniously let us us prepare
Some welcome for the Mistress of the house,

Sola, sola: woe ha ho, sola, sola.


Who calls?


Sola, did you see M. Lorenzo, and M. Lorenzo, sola, sola.


Leave hollowing man, here.


Sola, where, where?


Here?


Tell him there is a Post come from my Master, with his horn full of good news,
my Master will be here ere morning sweet soul


Let Us in, and there expect their coming.
And yet no matter: why should we go in?
My friend Stephen, signify pray you
Within the house, your Mistress is at hand,
And bring your music forth into the air.
How sweet the moone-light sleeps upon this bank,
Here will we sit, and let the sounds of music
Creep in our ears soft stilnes, and the night
Become the tutches of sweet harmony:
Sit Iessica, look how the floor of heaven
Is thick inlayed with pattens of bright gold,
There Is not the smallest or be which thou beholdst
But in his motion like an Angel sings,
Still quiring to the young eyed Cherubins;
Such harmony is in immortal souls,
But whilst this muddy vesture of decay
Does grossly close in it, we cannot hear it:
Come hoe, and wake Diana with a hymn,
With sweetest tutches pearce your Mistress ear,
And draw her home with music.

I am never merry when I hear sweet music.


The reason is, your spirits are attentive:
For do but note a wild and wanton heard
Or race of youthful and unhandled colts,
Fetching mad bounds, bellowing and neighing loud,
Which is the hot condition of their blood,
If they but hear perchance a trumpet sound,
Or any air of music touch their ears,
You shall perceive them make a mutual stand,
Their savage eyes turned to a modest gaze,
By the sweet power of music: therefore the Poet
Did feign that Orpheus drew trees, stones, and floods.
Since naught so stockish, hard, and full of rage,
But music for time does change his nature,
The man that has no music in himself,
Nor is not moved with concord of sweet sounds,
Is fit for treasons, stratagems, and spoils,
The motions of his spirit are dull as night,
And his affections dark as Erobus,
Let no such man be trusted: mark the music.

That light we see is burning in my hall:
How far that little candell throws his beams,
So shines a good deed in a naughty world.

When the moon shone we did not see the candle?


So does the greater glory dim the less,
A substitute shines brightly as a King
Until a King be by, and then his state
Empties it self, as does an inland brook
Into the maine of waters: music, hark.

It is your music Madame of the house.


Nothing is good I see without respect,
Methinkes it sounds much sweeter then by day?

Silence bestows that virtue on it Madam.


The Crow does sing as sweetly as the Lark
When neither is attended: and I think
The Nightingale if she should sing by day
When every Goose is cackling, would be thought
No better a Musician then the Wren?
How many things by season, seasoned are
To their right praise, and true perfection:
Peace, how the Moon sleeps with Endimion,
And would not be awaked.

That is the voice,
Or I am much deceived of Portia.

He knows me as the blind man knows the
Cuckoo by the bad voice?

Dear Lady welcome home?


We have been praying for our husbands welfare
Which speed we hope the better for our words,
Are they returned?

Madam, they are not yet:
But there is come a Messenger before
To signify their coming.

Go in Nerrissa,
Give order to my servants, that they take
No note at all of our being absent hence,
Nor you Lorenzo, Iessica nor you.

Your husband is at hand, I hear his Trumpet,
We are no tell-tales Madam, fear you not.

This night methinkes is but the daylight sick,
It looks a little paler, it is a day,
Such as the day is, when the Sun is hid.

We should hold day with the Antipodes,
If you would walk in absence of the sun.

Let me give light, but let me not be light,
For a light wife does make a heavy husband,
And never be Bassanio so for me,
But God sort all: you are welcome home my Lord.

I thank you Madam, give welcome to my friend
This is the man, this is Anthonio,
To whom I am so infinitely bound.

You should in all sense be much bound to him,
For as I hear he was much bound for you.

No more then I am well acquitted of.


Sir, you are very welcome to our house:
It must appear in other ways then words,
Therefore I scant this breathing courtesy.

By yonder Moon I swear you do me wrong,
In faith I gave it to the Judges Clearke,
Would he were gelt that had it for my part,
Since you do take it Love so much at heart.

A quarrel hoe already, what is the matter?


About a hoope of Gold, a paltry Ring
That she did give me, whose Poesy was
For all the world like Cutlers Poetry
Upon a knife; Love me, and leave me not.

What talk you of the Poesy or the value:
You swore to me when I did give it you,
That you would wear it til the hour of death,
And that it should lie with you in your grave,
Though not for me, yet for your vehement oaths,
You should have been respective and have kept it.
Gave it a Judges Clearke: but well I know
The Clearke will nere wear hair on's face that had it.

He will, and if he live to be a man.


I, if a Woman live to be a man.


Now by this hand I gave it to a youth,
A kind of boy, a little scrubbed boy,
No higher then thy self, the Judges Clearke,
A prating boy that begged it as a Fee,
I could not for my heart deny it him.

You were too blame, I must be plain with you,
To part so slightly with your wives first gift,
A thing stuck on with oaths upon your finger,
And so riueted with faith unto your flesh.
I gave my Love a Ring, and made him swear
Never to part with it, and here he stands:
I dare be sworn for him, he would not leave it,
Nor pluck it from his finger, for the wealth
That the world masters. Now in faith Gratiano,
You give your wife too unkind a cause of grief,
And 'twere to me I should be mad at it.

Why I were best to cut my left hand off,
And swear I lost the Ring defending it.

My Lord Bassanio gave his Ring away
Unto the Judge that begged it, and indeed
Deserved it too: and then the Boy his Clearke
That took some pains in writing, he begged mine,
And neither man nor master would take ought
But the two Rings.

What Ring gave you my Lord?
Not that I hope which you received of me.

If I could add a lie unto a fault,
I would deny it: but you see my finger
Has not the Ring upon it, it is gone.

Even so void is your false heart of truth.
By heaven I will nere come in your bed
Until I see the Ring.

Nor I in yours, til I again see mine.


Sweet Portia,
If you did know to whom I gave the Ring,
If you did know for whom I gave the Ring,
And would conceive for what I gave the Ring,
And how unwillingly I left the Ring,
When naught would be accepted but the Ring,
You would abate the strength of your displeasure?

If you had known the virtue of the Ring,
Or half her worthiness that gave the Ring,
Or your own honor to contain the Ring,
You would not then have parted with the Ring:
What man is there so much unreasonable,
If you had pleased to have defended it
With any terms of Zeal: wanted the modesty
To urge the thing held as a ceremony:
Nerrissa teaches me what to believe,
I Will die for it, but some Woman had the Ring?

No by mine honor Madam, by my soul
No Woman had it, but a civil Doctor,
Which did refuse three thousand Ducates of me,
And begged the Ring; the which I did deny him,
And suffered him to go displeased away:
Even he that had held up the very life
Of my dear friend. What should I say sweet Lady?
I was enforced to send it after him,
I was beset with shame and courtesy,
My honor would not let ingratitude
So much besmeare it. Pardon me good Lady,
And by these blessed Candles of the night,
Had you been there, I think you would have begged
The Ring of me, to give the worthy Doctor?

Let not that Doctor ere come near my house,
Since he has got the jewel that I loved,
And that which you did swear to keep for me,
I will become as liberal as you,
I Will not deny him any thing I have,
No, not my body, nor my husbands bed:
Know him I shall, I am well sure of it.
Lie not a night from home. Watch me like Argos,
If you do not, if I be left alone,
Now by mine honor which is yet mine own,
I Will have the Doctor for my bedfellow.

And I his Clarke: therefore be well advised
How you do leave me to mine own protection.

Well, do you so: let not me take him then,
For if I do, i will mar the young Clarks pen.

I am the unhappy subject of these quarrels.


Sir, grieve not you,
You are welcome notwithstanding.

Portia, forgive me this enforced wrong,
And in the hearing of these many friends
I swear to thee, even by thine own fair eyes
Wherein I see my self.

Mark you but that?
In both my eyes he doubly sees himself:
In each eye one, swear by your double self,
And there is an oath of credit.

Nay, but hear me.
Pardon this fault, and by my soul I swear
I never more will break an oath with thee.

I once did lend my body for thy wealth,
Which but for him that had your husbands ring
Had quite miscarried. I dare be bound again,
My soul upon the forfeit, that your Lord
Will never more break faith advisedly.

Then you shall be his surety: give him this,
And bid him keep it better then the other.

Here Lord Bassanio, swear to keep this ring.


By heaven it is the same I gave the Doctor.


I had it of him: pardon Bassanio,
For by this ring the Doctor lay with me.

And pardon me my gentle Gratiano,
For that same scrubbed boy the Doctors Clarke
In liew of this, last night did lie with me.

Why this is like the mending of high ways
In Summer, where the ways are fair enough:
What, are we Cuckolds ere we have deserved it.

Speak not so grossly, you are all amazed;
Here is a letter, read it at your leisure,
It comes from Padua from Bellario,
There you shall find that Portia was the Doctor,
Nerrissa there her Clarke. Lorenzo here
Shall witness I set forth as soon as you,
And but even now returned: I have not yet
Entered my house. Anthonio you are welcome,
And I have better news in store for you
Then you expect: unseal this letter soon,
There you shall find three of your Argosies
Are richly come to harbor so dainlie.
You shall not know by what strange accident
I chanced on this letter.

I am dumb.


Were you the Doctor, and I knew you not?


Were you the Clark that is to make me cuckold.


I, but the Clark that never means to do it,
Unless he live until he be a man.

(Sweet Doctor) you shall be my bedfellow,
When I am absent, then he with my wife.

(Sweet Lady) you have given me life and living;
For here I read for certain that my ships
Are safely come to Rode.

How now Lorenzo?
My Clarke has some good comforts to for you.

I, and I Will give them him without a fee.
There do I give to you and Iessica
From the rich Jew, a special deed of gift
After his death, of all he dies possessed of.

Fair Ladies you drop Manna in the way
Of starued people.

It is almost morning,
And yet I am sure you are not satisfied
Of these events at full. Let us go in,
And charge us there upon intergatories,
And we will answer all things faithfully.

Let it be so, the first intergatory
That my Nerrissa shall be sworn on, is,
Whether till the next night she had rather stay,
Or go to bed, now being two hours to day,
But were the day come, I should wish it dark,
Till I were couching with the Doctors Clarke.
Well, while I live, I Will fear no other thing
So sore, as keeping safe Nerrissas ring.


