SIr Hugh, persuade me not: I will make a Star Chamber matter of it, if he
were twenty Sir John Falstoffs, he shall not abuse Robert Shallow Esquire


In the County of Gloucester, Justice of Peace and Coram.


I (Cosen Slender) and Cust-alorum.


I, and Rato lorum too; and a Gentleman borne (Master Parson) who writes
himself Armigero, in any Bill, Warrant, Quittance, or Obligation, Armigero


I that I do, and have done any time these three hundred years.


All his successors (gone before him) has don't: and all his Ancestors (that
come after him) may: they may give the dozen white Luces in their Coat


It is an old Coat.


The dozen white Lowses do become an old Coat well: it agrees well passant: It
is a familiar beast to man, and signifies Love


The Luse is the fresh-fish, the salt-fish, is an old Coat.


I may quarter (Coz).


You may, by marrying.


It is marring indeed, if he quarter it.


Not a whit.


Yes per-lady: if he has a quarter of your coat, there is but three Skirts for
your self, in my simple conjectures; but that is all one: if Sir John
Falstaff have committed disparagements unto you, I am of the Church and will
be glad to do my benevolence, to make attonements and compremises between you


The Council shall hear it, it is a Riot.


It is not meet the Council hear a Riot: there is no fear of Got in a Riot:
The Council (look you) shall desire to hear the fear of Got, and not to
hear a Riot: take your viza-ments in that


Ha; of my life, if I were young again, the sword should end it.


It is petter that friends is the sword, and end it: and there is also another
device in my praine, which peradventure prings goot discretions with it. There
is Anne Page, which is daughter to Master Thomas Page, which is pretty
virginity


Mistress Anne Page? she has brown hair, and speaks small like a woman.


It is that ferry person for all the orld, as just as you will desire, and
seven hundred pounds of Moneys, and Gold, and Silver, is her Grand-sire upon
his deaths-bed, (Got deliver to a joyful resurrections) give, when she is able
to overtake seventeen years old. It were a goot motion, if we leave our
pribbles and prabbles, and desire a marriage between Master Abraham, and
Mistress Anne Page


Did her Grand-sire leave her seven hundred pound?


I, and her father is make her a petter penny.


I know the young Gentlewoman, she has good gifts.


Seven hundred pounds, and possibilities, is goot gifts.


Well, let us see honest Mr Page: is Falstaff there?


Shall I tell you a lie? I do despise a liar, as I do despise one that is
false, or as I despise one that is not true: the Knight Sir John is there, and
I beseech you be ruled by your well-willers: I will peat the door for Mr.
Page. What hoa? Got-plesse your house here


Who Is there?


Here is go't's plessing and your friend, and Justice Shallow, and here young
Master Slender: that peraduentures shall tell you another tale, if matters grow
to your likings


I am glad to see your Worships well: I thank you for my Venison Master
Shallow


Master Page, I am glad to see you: much good do it your good heart: I wished
your Venison better, it was ill killd: how does good Mistress Page? and I
thank you always with my heart, la: with my heart


Sir, I thank you.


Sir, I thank you: by yea, and no I do.


I am glad to see you, good Master Slender.


How does your fallow Greyhound, Sir, I heard say he was outrun on Cotsall.


It could not be judged, Sir.


You Will not confess: you will not confess.


That he will not, it is your fault, it is your fault: it is a good dog.


A Cur, Sir.


Sir: he is a good dog, and a fair dog, can there be more said? he is good,
and fair. Is Sir John Falstaff here


Sir, he is within: and I would I could do a good office between you.


It is spoke as a Christians ought to speak.


He has wronged me (Master Page.)


Sir, he does in some sort confess it.


If it be confessed, it is not redressed; is not that so (M. Page?) he has
wronged me, indeed he has, at a word he has: believe me, Robert Shallow
Esquire, says he is wronged


Here comes Sir John.


Now, Master Shallow, you will complain of me to the King?


Knight, you have beaten my men, killed my dear, and broke open my Lodge.


But not kissed your Keepers daughter?


Tut, a pin: this shall be answered.


I will answer it strait, I have done all this:
That is now answered.

The Council shall know this.


'Twere better for you if it were known in council: you will be laughed at.


Pauca verba; (Sir John) good worts.


Good worts? good Cabidge; Slender, I broke your head: what matter have you
against me


Marry sir, I have matter in my head against you, and against your
cony-catching Rascals, Bardolf, Nym, and Pistol


You Banbery Cheese.


I, it is no matter.


How now, Mephostophilus?


I, it is no matter.


Slice, I say; pauca. pauca: Slice, that is my humor.


Where Is Simple my man? can you tell, Cosen?


Peace, I pray you: now let us understand: there is three Vmpires in this
matter, as I understand; that is, Master Page (fidelicet Master Page,) and
there is my self, (fidelicet my self) and the three party is (lastly, and
finally) mine Host of the Gater


We three to hear it, and end it between them.


Ferry goo't, I will make a priefe of it in my note-booke, and we will
afterward orke upon the cause, with as great discreetly as we can


Pistol.


He hears with ears.


The Teuill and his Tam: what phrase is this? he hears with ear? why, it is
affectations


Pistol, did you pick M. Slenders purse?


I, by these gloves did he, or I would I might never come in mine own great
chamber again else, of seven groates in mill-sixpences, and two Edward
Shouelboords, that cost me two shilling and two pence a piece of Yead Miller:
by these gloves


Is this true, Pistol?


No, it is false, if it is a picke-purse.


Ha, thou mountain Forreyner: Sir John, and Master mine, I combat challenge of
this Latin Bilboe: word of denial in thy labras here; word of denial; froth,
and scum thou lie


By these gloves, then 'twas he.


Be auis'd sir, and pass good humors: I will say marry trap with you, if you
run the nut-hooks humor on me, that is the very note of it


By this hat, then he in the red face had it: for though I cannot remember what
I did when you made me drunk, yet I am not altogether an ass


What say you Scarlet, and John?


Why sir, (for my part) I say the Gentleman had drunk himself out of his five
sentences


It is his five senses: fie, what the ignorance is.


And being fap, sir, was (as they say) casheerd: and so conclusions past the
Car-eires


I, you spoke in Latten then to: but it is no matter; I Will nere be drunk whilst I
live again, but in honest, civil, godly company for this trick: if I be
drunk, I Will be drunk with those that have the fear of God, and not with
drunken knaves


So got-udge me, that is a vertuons mind.


You hear all these matters denied, Gentlemen; you hear it.


Nay daughter, carry the wine in, we will drink within.


Oh heaven: This is Mistress Anne Page.


How now Mistress Ford?


Mistress Ford, by my troth you are very well met: by your leave good Mistress.


Wife, bid these gentlemen welcome: come, we have a hot Venison pasty to
dinner; Come gentlemen, I hope we shall drink down all unkindness


I had rather then forty shillings I had my book of Songs and Sonnets here:
How now Simple, where have you been? I must wait on my self, must I? you have
not the book of Riddles about you, have you


Book of Riddles? why did you not lend it to Alice Short-cake upon Alhallowmas
last, a fortnight before Michaelmas


Come Coz, come Coz, we stay for you: a word with you Coz: marry this, Coz:
there is as 'twere a tender, a kind of tender, made a farre-off by Sir Hugh
here: do you understand me


I Sir, you shall find me reasonable; if it be so, I shall do that that is
reason


Nay, but understand me.


So I do Sir.


Give ear to his motions; (Mr. Slender) I will description the matter to you,
if you be capacity of it


Nay, I will do as my Cozen Shallow says: I pray you pardon me, he is a
Justice of Peace in his Country, simple though I stand here


But that is not the question: the question is concerning your marriage.


I, there is the point Sir.


Marry is it: the very point of it, to Mi. An Page.


Why if it be so; I will marry her upon any reasonable demands.


But can you affection the 'o-man, let us command to know that of your mouth,
or of your lips: for diverse Philosophers hold, that the lips is parcel of the
mouth: therefore precisely, ca^ you carry your good will to ye maid


Cosen Abraham Slender, can you love her?


I hope sir, I will do as it shall become one that would do reason.


Nay, got's Lords, and his Ladies, you must speak possitable, if you can
carry-her your desires toward her


That you must:
Will you, (upon good dowry) marry her?

I will do a greater thing then that, upon your request (Cosen) in any reason.


Nay conceive me, conceive me, (sweet Coz): what I do is to pleasure you
(Coz:) can you love the maid


I will marry her (Sir) at your request; but if there be no great love in the
beginning, yet Heaven may decrease it upon better acquaintance, when we are
married, and have more occasion to know one another: I hope upon familiarity
will grow more content: but if you say mary-her, I will mary-her, that I am
freely dissolved, and dissolutely


It is a fery discetion-answere; save the fall is in the'ord, dissolutely: the
ort is (according to our meaning) resolutely: his meaning is good


I: I think my Cosen meant well.


I, or else I would I might be hanged (la.)


Here comes fair Mistress Anne; would I were young for your sake, Mistress Anne.


The dinner is on the Table, my Father desires your worships company.


I will wait on him, (fair Mistress Anne.)


Od's plessed-wil: I will not be abse^ce at the grace.


Will It please your worship to come in, Sir?


No, I thank you forsooth, heartily; I am very well.


The dinner attends you, Sir.


I am not a-hungry, I thank you, forsooth: go, Sirrah, for all you are my man,
go wait upon my Cosen Shallow: a Justice of peace sometime may be beholding to
his friend, for a Man; I keep but three Men, and a Boy yet, till my Mother be
dead: but what though, yet I live like a poor Gentleman borne


I may not go in without your worship: they will not sit till you come.


IN faith, i will eat nothing: I thank you as much as though I did.


I pray you Sir walk in.


I had rather walk here (I thank you) I bruiz'd my shin the other day, with
playing at Sword and Dagger with a Master of Fence (three veneys for a dish of
stewed Prunes) and by my troth, I cannot abide the smell of hot meat since.
Why do your dogs bark so? be there Bears in the Town


I think there are, Sir, I heard them talked of.


I love the sport well, but I shall as soon quarrel at it, as any man in
England: you are afraid if you see the Bear loose, are you not


I indeed Sir.


That Is meat and drink to me now: I have seen Sackerson loose, twenty times,
and have taken him by the Chain: but (I warrant you) the women have so cride
and shrekt at it, that it past: But women indeed, cannot abide'em, they are
very ill-fauour'd rough things


Come, gentle M. Slender, come; we stay for you.


I Will eat nothing, I thank you Sir.


By cock and pie, you shall not choose, Sir: come, come.


Nay, pray you lead the way.


Come on, Sir.


Mistress Anne: your self shall go first.


Not I Sir, pray you keep on.


Truly I will not go first: truely-la: I will not do you that wrong.


I pray you Sir.


I Will rather be unmannerly, then troublesome: you do your self wrong
indeede-la


Go your ways, and ask of Doctor Caius house, which is the way; and there
dwells one Mistress Quickly; which is in the manner of his Nurse; or his
dry-Nurse; or his Cook; or his Laundry; his Washer, and his Ringer


Well Sir.


Nay, it is petter yet: give her this letter; for it is a'oman that
altogeathers acquaintance with Mistress Anne Page; and the Letter is to desire,
and require her to solicit your Masters desires, to Mistress Anne Page: I pray
you be gone: I will make an end of my dinner; there is Pippins and Cheese to come


Mine Host of the Garter?


What says my Bully Rooke? speak schollerly, and wisely.


Truly mine Host; I must turn away some of my followers.


Discard, (bully Hercules) casheere; let them wag; trot, trot.


I sit at ten pounds a week.


You Are an Emperor ( Caesar, Keiser and Pheazar) I will entertain Bardolfe: he
shall draw; he shall tap; said I well (bully Hector?


Do so (good mine Host.


I have spoke: let him follow: let me see thee froth, and live: I am at a word:
follow


Bardolfe, follow him: a Tapster is a good trade: an old Cloak, makes a new
Ierkin: a withered Seruing-man, a fresh Tapster: go, adieu


It is a life that I have desired: I will thrive.


O base hungarian wight: wilt you the spigot wield.


He was gotten in drink: is not the humor co^ceited?


I am glad I am so acquit of this Tinderbox: his Thefts were too open: his
filching was like an unskillful Singer, he kept not time


The good humor is to steal at a minutes rest.


Convey: the wise it call: Steal? foh: a fico for the phrase.


Well sirs, I am almost out at heels.


Why then let Kibes ensue.


There is no remedy: I must conicatch, I must shift.


Young Ravens must have food.


Which of you know Ford of this Town?


I ken the wight: he is of substance good.


My honest Lads, I will tell you what I am about.


Two yards, and more.


No quips now Pistol: (Indeed I am in the waste two yards about: but I am now
about no waste: I am about thrift) briefly: I do mean to make love to Fords
wife: I spy entertainment in her: she discourses: she carues: she gives the
leere of inuitation: I can construe the action of her familier style, and the
hardest voice of her behauior (to be englished rightly) is, I am Sir John
Falstafs


He has studied her will; and translated her will: out of honesty, into
English


The Anchor is deep: will that humor pass?


Now, the report goes, she has all the rule of her husbands Purse: he has a
legend of Angels


As many devils entertain: and to her Boy say I.


The humor rises: it is good: humor me the angels.


I have writ me here a letter to her: and here another to Pages wife, who even
now gave me good eyes too; examind my parts with most judicious illiads:
sometimes the beam of her view, gilded my foot: sometimes my portly belly


Then did the Sun on dunghill shine.


I thank thee for that humor.


O she did so course over my exteriors with such a greedy intention, that the
appetite of her eye, did seem to scorch me up like a burning-glasse: here is
another letter to her: She bears the Purse too: She is a Region in Guiana: all
gold, and bounty: I will be Cheaters to them both, and they shall be
Exchequers to me: they shall be my East and West Indies, and I will trade to
them both: Go, bear thou this Letter to Mistress Page; and thou this to
Mistress Ford: we will thrive (Lads) we will thrive


Shall I Sir Pandarus of Troy become,
And by my side wear Steel? then Lucifer take all.

I will run no base humor: here take the humor-Letter; I will keep the hauior
of reputation


Hold Sirrah, bear you these Letters tightly,
Sail like my Pinnasse to these golden shores.
Rogues, hence, auaunt, vanish like haile-stones; go,
Trudge; plod away in the hoof: seek shelter, pack:
Falstaff will learn the honor of the age,
French-thrift, you Rogues, my self, and skirted Page.

Let Vultures gripe thy guts: for gourd, and
Fullam holds: and high and low beguiles the rich and poor,
Tester i will have in pouch when thou shall lack,
Base Phrygian Turk.

I have opperations,
Which be humors of revenge.

Will thou revenge?


By Welkin, and her Star.


With wit, or Steel?


With both the humors, I:
I will discuss the humor of this Love to Ford.

And I to Page shall eke unfold
How Falstaff (varlet vile)
His Dove will prove; his gold will hold,
And his soft couch defile.

My humor shall not cool: I will incense Ford to deal with poison: I will
possess him with yallownesse, for the revolt of mine is dangerous: that is my
true humor


Thou art the Mars of Malcontents: I second thee: troop on.


What, John Rugby, I pray thee go to the Casement, and see if you can see my
Master, Master Docter Caius coming: if he do (IN faith) and find any body in
the house; here will be an old abusing of Gods patience, and the Kings English


I Will go watch.


Go, and we'll have a posset for it soon at night, (in faith) at the latter
end of a Sea-cole-fire: An honest, willing, kind fellow, as ever servant shall
come in house withal: and I warrant you, no tel-tale, nor no breedebate: his
worst fault is, that he is given to prayer; he is something peevish that way:
but no body but has his fault: but let that pass. Peter Simple, you say your
name is


I: for fault of a better.


And Master Slender's your Master?


I forsooth.


Does he not wear a great round Beard, like a Glouers pairing-knife?


No forsooth: he has but a little we face; with a little yellow Beard: a
Caine colored Beard


A softly-sprighted man, is he not?


I forsooth: but he is as tall a man of his hands, as any is between this and
his head: he has fought with a Warrener


How say you: oh, I should remember him: does he not hold up his head (as it
were?) and strut in his gate


Yes indeed does he.


Well, heaven send Anne Page, no worse fortune: Tell Master Parson Euans, I
will do what I can for your Master: Anne is a good girl, and I wish --


Out alas: here comes my Master.


We shall all be shent: Run in here, good young man: go into this Closset: he
will not stay long: what John Rugby? John: what John I say? go John, go
enquire for my Master, I doubt he be not well, that he comes not home: (and
down, down, adowne'a. etc


Vat is you sing? I do not like des-toyes: pray you go and vetch me in my
Closset, vnboyteene verd; a Box, a greene-a-Box: do intend vat I speak? a
greene-a-Box


I forsooth i will fetch it you: I am glad he went not in himself: if he had
found the young man he would have bin horne-mad


Fe, fe, fe, fe, maifoy, il fait for ehando, Ie man voi a le Court la grand
affairs.


Is it this Sir?


Any met le au mon pocket, de-petch quickly:
Vere is dat knave Rugby?

What John Rugby, John?


Here Sir.


You are John Rugby, aad you are Jack Rugby:
Come, take-a-your Rapier, and come after my heel to the Court.

It Is ready Sir, here in the Porch.


By my trot: I tarry too long: od's-me: que ay ie oublie: dear is some Simples
in my Closset, dat I will not for the varld I shall leave behind


Ay-me, he will find the young man there, and be mad.


O Diable, Diable: vat is in my Closset?
Villainy, La-roone: Rugby, my Rapier.

Good Master be content.


Wherefore shall I be content-a?


The young man is an honest man.


What shall de honest man do in my Closset: dear is no honest man dat shall
come in my Closset


I beseech you be not so flegmaticke: hear the truth of it. He came of an
errand to me, from Parson Hugh


Vell.


I forsooth: to desire her to --


Peace, I pray you.


Peace-a-your tongue: speake-a-your Tale.


To desire this honest Gentlewoman (your Maid) to speak a good word to Mistress
Anne Page, for my Master in the way of Marriage


This is all indeede-la: but i will nere put my finger in the fire, and need not.


Sir Hugh send-a you? Rugby, ballow me some paper: tarry you a littell-a-while.


I am glad he is so quiet if he had bin thoroughly moved, you should have heard
him so loud, and so melancholy: but notwithstanding man, I Will do yoe your
Master what good I can: and the very yea, and the no is, ye French Doctor my
Master, (I may call him my Master, look you, for I keep his house; and I
wash, ^ing, brew, bake, scowre, dress meat and drink, make the beds, and do
all my self.


It Is a great charge to come under one bodies hand.


Are you a-uis'd of that? you shall find it a great charge: and to be up
early, and down later but notwithstanding, (to tell you in your ear, I would
have no words of it) my Master himself is in love with Mistress Anne Page: but
notwithstanding that I know Ans mind, that is neither here nor there


You, lack 'Nape: give-'a this Letter to Sir Hugh, by gar it is a shallenge: I
will cut his troat in de Park, and I will teach a souruy lack-a-nape Priest to
meddle, or make: -- you may be gone: it is not good you tarry here: by gar I
will cut all his two stones: by gar, he shall not have a stone to throw at his
dog


Alas: he speaks but for his friend.


It is no matter'a ver dat: do not you tell-a-me dat I shall have Anne Page for
my self? by gar, I will kill de Iack-Priest: and I have appointed mine Host of
de Iarteer to measure our weapon: by gar, I will my self have Anne Page


Sir, the maid loves you, and all shall be well:
We must give folks leave to prate: what the good-ier.

Rugby, come to the Court with me: by gar, if I have not Anne Page, I shall
turn your head out of my door: follow my heels, Rugby


You shall have An-fooles head of your own: No, I know Ans mind for that:
never a woman in Windsor knows more of Ans mind then I do, nor can do more
then I do with her, I thank heaven


Who Is with in there, hoa?


Who Is there, I troa? Come near the house I pray you.


How now (good woman) how do thou?


The better that it pleases your good Worship to ask?


What news? how does pretty Mistress Anne?


In truth Sir, and she is pretty, and honest, and gentle, and one that is your
friend, I can tell you that by the way, I praise heaven for it


Shall I do any good think thou? shall I not loose my suit?


Troth Sir, all is in his hands above: but notwithstanding (Master Fenton) I Will
be sworn on a book she loves you: have not your Worship a wart above your
eye


Yes marry have I, what of that?


Well, thereby hangs a tale: good faith, it is such another Nan; (but (I detest)
an honest maid as ever broke bread: we had an hours talk of that wart; I
shall never laugh but in that maids company: but (indeed) she is given too
much to Allicholy and musing: but for you -- well -- go too --


Well: I shall see her to day: hold, there is money for thee: Let me have thy
voice in my behalf: if thou see her before me, commend me. --


Will I? I faith that we will: And I will tell your Worship more of the Wart,
the next time we have confidence, and of other wooers


Well, farewell, I am in great haste now.


Farewell to your Worship: truly an honest Gentleman: but Anne loves hiim
not: for I know Ans mind as well as another does: out upon it: what have I
forgot


What, have escaped Loue-letters in the holly-day-time of my beauty, and am I
now a subject for them? let me see

Ask me no reason why I love you, for though Love use Reason for his
precisian, he admits him not for his Counsailour: you are not young, no more am
I: go to then, there is simpathie: you are merry, so am I: ha, ha, then there is
more simpathie: you love sack, and so do I: would you desire better simpathie?
Let it suffice thee (Mistress Page) at the least if the Love of Soldier can
suffice, that I love thee: I will not say pity me, it is not a Souldier-like
phrase; but I say, love me:

By me, thine own true Knight, by day or night:
Or any kind of light, with all his might,
For thee to fight.
John Falstaff.



What a Herod of Jury is this? O wicked, wicked world:
One that is well-nye worn to pieces with age
To show himself a young Gallant? What an vnwaied
Behavior has this Flemish drunkard picked (with
The Devils name) out of my conversation, that he dares
In this manner assay me? why, he has not been thrice
In my Company: what should I say to him? I was then
Frugall of my mirth: (heaven forgive me:) why I Will
Exhibit a Bill in the Parliament for the putting down of men: how shall I be
revenged on him? for revenged I will be? as sure as his guts are made of
puddings


Mistress Page, trust me, I was going to your house.


And trust me, I was coming to you: you look very ill.


Nay, I Will nere beleeee that; I have to show to the contrary.


'Faith but you do in my mind.


Well: I do then: yet I say, I could show you to the contrary: O Mistress Page,
give me some counsel


What Is the matter, woman?


O woman: if it were not for one trifling respect, I could come to such honor.


Hang the trifle (woman) take the honor: what is it? dispense with trifles:
what is it


If I would but go to hell, for an eternal moment, or so: I could be knighted.


What thou lie? Sir Alice Ford? these Knights will hacke, and so thou
should not alter the article of thy Gentry


We burn daylight: here, read, read: perceive how I might be knighted, I
shall think the worse of fat men, as long as I have an eye to make difference
of men's liking: and yet he would not swear: praise women's modesty: and gave
such orderly and wel-behaued reproof to al uncomeliness, that I would have
sworn his disposition would have gone to the truth of his words: but they do
no more adhere and keep place together, then the hundred Psalms to the tune of
Green-sleeues: What tempest (I troa) threw this Whale, (with so many Tuns of
oil in his belly) a'shoare at Windsor? How shall I be revenged on him? I
think the best way were, to entertain him with hope, till the wicked fire of
lust have melted him in his own grease: Did you ever hear the like


Letter for letter; but that the name of Page and Ford differs: to thy great
comfort in this mystery of ill opinions, here is the twyn-brother of thy
Letter: but let thine inherit first, for I protest mine never shall: I warrant
he has a thousand of these Letters, writ with blancke-space for different
names (sure more): and these are of the second edition: he will print them out
of doubt: for he cares not what he puts into the press, when he would put us
two: I had rather be a Giantesse, and lie under Mount Pelion: Well; I will find
you twenty lascivious Turtles ere one chaste man


Why this is the very same: the very hand: the very words: what does he think
of us


Nay I know not: it makes me almost ready to wrangle with mine own honesty:
I Will entertain my self like one that I am not acquainted withal: for sure
unless he know some strain in me, that I know not my self, he would never
have boorded me in this fury


Boording, call you it? I Will be sure to keep him above deck.


So will I: if he come under my hatches, I Will never to Sea again: Let Us be
revenged on him: let us appoint him a meeting: give him a show of comfort in his
Suit, and lead him on with a fine baited delay, till he has pawned his horses
to mine Host of the Garter


Nay, I will consent to act any villainy against him, that may not sully the
chariness of our honesty: oh that my husband saw this Letter: it would give
eternal food to his jealousy


Why look where he comes; and my good man too: he is as far from jealousy,
as I am from giving him cause, and that (I hope) is an unmeasurable distance


You are the happier woman.


Let Us consult together against this greasy Knight: Come hither.


Well: I hope, it be not so.


Hope is a curtall-dog in some affairs:
Sir John affects thy wife.

Why sir, my wife is not young.


He wooes both high and low, both rich and poor, both young and old, one with
another (Ford) he loves the Gally-mawfry (Ford) perpend


Love my wife?


With liver, burning hot: prevent:
Or go thou like Sir Acteon he, with
Ring-wood at thy heels: O, odious is the name.

What name Sir?


The horn I say: Farewell:
Take heed, have open eye, for thieves do foot by night.
Take heed, ere summer comes, or Cuckoo-birds do sing.
Away sir Corporal Nim:
Believe it (Page) he speaks sense.

I will be patient: I will find out this.


And this is true: I like not the humor of lying: he has wronged me in some
humors: I should have borne the humored Letter to her: but I have a sword: and
it shall bite upon my necessity: he loves your wife; There Is the short and the
long: My name is Corporal Nim: I speak, and I avouch; it is true: my name is
Nim: and Falstaff loves your wife: adieu, I love not the humor of bread and
cheese: adieu


The humor of it (quoth'a?) here is a fellow frights English out of his wits.


I will seek out Falstaff.


I never heard such a drawling-affecting rogue.


If I do find it: well.


I will not believe such a Cataian, though the Priest of the Town commended
him for a true man


'Twas a good sensible fellow: well.


How now Meg?


Whether go you (George?) hark you.


How now (sweet Frank) why art thou melancholy?


I melancholy? I am not melancholy:
Get you home: go.

Faith, thou have some crochets in thy head,
Now: will you go, Mistress Page?

Have with you: you will come to dinner George? Look who comes yonder: she
shall be our Messenger to this paltrie Knight


Trust me, I thought on her: she will fit it.


You are come to see my daughter Anne?


I forsooth: and I pray how does good Mistress Anne?


Go in with us and see: we have an hours talk with you.


How now Master Ford?


You heard what this knave told me, did you not?


Yes, and you heard what the other told me?


Do you think there is truth in them?


Hang 'em slaves: I do not think the Knight would offer it: But these that
accuse him in his intent toward our wives, are a yoke of his discarded men:
very rogues, now they be out of service


Were they his men?


Marry were they.


I like it never the beter for that,
Does he lie at the Garter?

I marry does he: if he should intend this voyage toward my wife, I would
turn her loose to him; and what he gets more of her, then sharp words, let
it lie on my head


I do not misdoubt my wife: but I would be loath to turn them together: a
man may be too confident: I would have nothing lie on my head: I cannot be thus
satisfied


Look where my ranting-Host of the Garter comes: there is either liquor in his
pate, or money in his purse, when he looks so merrily: How now mine Host


How now Bully-Rooke: you are a Gentleman Caueleiro Justice, I say.


I follow, (mine Host) I follow: Good-euen, and twenty (good Master Page.)
Master Page, will you go with us? we have sport in hand


Tell him Caueleiro-Iustice: tell him Bully-Rooke.


Sir, there is a fray to be fought, between Sir Hugh the Welsh Priest, and
Caius the French Doctor


Good mine Host of the Garter: a word with you.


What say thou, my Bully-Rooke?


Will you go with us to behold it? My merry Host has had the measuring of
their weapons; and (I think) has appointed them contrary places: for (believe
me) I hear the Parson is no Iester: hark, I will tell you what our sport
shall be


Have thou no suit against my Knight? my guest-Caualeire?


None, I protest: but I Will give you a pottle of burned sack, to give me
recourse to him, and tell him my name is Broom: only for a ^est


My hand, (Bully:) thou shall have egresse and regresse, (said I well?) and thy
name shall be Broom. It is a merry Knight: will you go An-heires


Have with you mine Host.


I have heard the Frenchman has good skill in his Rapier.


Tut sir: I could have told you more: In these times you stand on distance:
your Passes, Stoccado's, and I know not what: it is the heart (Master Page) it is
here, it is here: I have seen the time, with my long-sword, I would have made
you four tall fellows skippe like Rattes


Here boys, here, here: shall we wag?


Have with you: I had rather hear them scold, then fight.


Though Page be a secure fool, and stands so firmly on his wives frailty;
yet, I cannot put-off my opinion so easily: she was in his company at Pages
house: and what they made there, I know not. Well, I will look further into it,
and I have a disguise, to sound Falstaff; if I find her honest, I loose not
my labor: if she be otherwise, it is labor well bestowed


I will not lend thee a penny.


Why then the world's mine Oyster, which I, with sword will open.


Not a penny: I have been content (Sir,) you should lay my countenance to
pawn: I have grated upon my good friends for three Repreeues for you, and your
Coach-fellow Nim; or else you had looked through the grate, like a Geminy of
Baboones: I am damned in hell, for swearing to Gentlemen my friends, you were
good Soldiers, and tall-fellowes. And when Mistress Bright lost the handle of
her Fan, I took't upon mine honor thou had it not


Did not thou share? had thou not fifteen pence?


Reason, you rogue, reason: think thou I Will endanger my soul, gratis? at a
word, hang no more about me, I am no gibbet for you: go, a short knife, and a
throng, to your Manor of Pickt-hatch: go, you will not bear a Letter for me
you rogue? you stand upon your honor: why, (thou vnconfinable baseness) it is
as much as I can do to keep the terms of my hononor precise: I, I, I my
self sometimes, leaving the fear of heaven on the left hand, and hiding mine
honor in my necessity, am feign to shufflle: to hedge, and to lurch, and yet,
you Rogue, will en-sconce your rags; your Cat-a-Mountaine-lookes, your
red-lattice phrases, and your bold-beating-oathes, under the shelter of your
honor? you will not do it? you


I do relent: what would thou more of man?


Sir, here is a woman would speak with you.


Let her approach.


Give your worship good morrow.


Good Morrow, good-wife.


Not so and't please your worship.


Good maid then.


I Will be sworn,
As my mother was the first hour I was borne.

I do believe the swearer; what with me?


Shall I vouch-safe your worship a word, or two?


Two thousand (fair woman) and i will vouchsafe thee the hearing.


There is one Mistress Ford, (Sir) I pray come a little nearer this ways: I
my self dwell with M. Doctor Caius


Well, on; Mistress Ford, you say.


Your worship says very true: I pray your worship come a little nearer this
ways


I warrant thee, no-bodie hears: mine own people, mine own people.


Are they so? heauen-blesse them, and make them his Servants.


Well; Mistress Ford, what of her?


Why, Sir; she is a good-creature; Lord, Lord, your Worship's a wanton: well:
heaven forgive you, and all of us, I pray --


Mistress Ford: come, Mistress Ford.


Marry this is the short, and the long of it: you have brought her into such a
Canaries, as it is wonderful: the best Courtier of them all (when the Court lay
at Windsor) could never have brought her to such a Canarie: yet there has been
Knights, and Lords, and Gentlemen, with their Coaches; I warrant you Coach
after Coach, letter after letter, gift after gift, smelling so sweetly; all
Musk, and so rushling, I warrant you, in silk and gold, and in such alligant
terms, and in such wine and sugar of the best, and the fairest, that would
have won any woman's heart: and I warrant you, they could never get an
eye-winke of her: I had my self twenty Angels given me this morning, but I
defy all Angels (in any such sort, as they say) but in the way of honesty: and
I warrant you, they could never get her so much as sippe on a cup with the
prowdest of them all, and yet there has been Earls: nay, (which is more)
Pentioners, but I warrant you all is one with her


But what says she to me? be brief my good she- Mercury.


Marry, she has received your Letter: for the which she thanks you a thousand
times; and she gives you to notify, that her husband will be absence from his
house, between ten and eleven


Ten, and eleven.


I, forsooth: and then you may come and see the picture (she says) that you
wot of: Master Ford her husband will be from home: alas, the sweet woman leads
an ill life with him: he is a very iealousie-man; she leads a very frampold
life with him, (good heart.


Ten, and eleven.
Woman, commend me to her, I will not fail her.

Why, you say well: But I have another messenger to your worship: Mistress
Page has her hearty commendations to you to: and let me tell you in your
ear, she is as fartuous a civil modest wife, and one (I tell you) that will
not miss you morning nor evening prayer, as any is in Windsor, who ere be the
other: and she bade me tell your worship, that her husband is seldom from
home, but she hopes there will come a time. I never knew a woman so doat upon
a man; surely I think you have charms, la: yes in truth


Not I, I assure thee; setting the attraction of my good parts aside, I have no
other charms


Blessing on your heart for it.


But I pray thee tell me this: has Fords wife, and Pages wife acquainted each
other, how they love me


That were a jest indeed: they have not so little grace I hope, that were a
trick indeed: But Mistress Page would desire you to send her your little Page
of al loves: her husband has a marvelous infectio^ to the little Page: and
truly Master Page is an honest man: never a wife in Windsor leads a better
life then she does: do what she will, say what she will, take all, pay all,
go to bed when she list, rise when she list, all is as she will: and truly she
deserves it; for if there be a kind woman in Windsor, she is one: you must
send her your Page, no remedy


Why, I will.


Nay* but do so then, and look you, he may come and go between you both:
and in any case have a nay-word, that you may know one another mind, and the
Boy never need to understand any thing; for it is not good that children should
know any wickedness: old folks you know, have discretion, as they say, and
know the world


Farethee-well, commend me to them both: there is my purse, I am yet thy
debtor: Boy, go along with this woman, this news distracts me


This Puncke is one of Cupids Carriers,
Clap on more sails, pursue: up with your fights:
Give fire: she is my prize, or Ocean whelme them all.

Say thou so (old Jack) go thy ways: I Will make more of thy old body then I
have done: will they yet look after thee? will thou after the expense of so
much money, be now a gainer? good Body, I thank thee: let them say it is
grossly done, so it be fairly done, no matter


Sir John, there is one Master Broom below would feign speak with you, and be
acquainted with you; and has sent your worship a mornings draught of Sack


Broom is his name?


I Sir.


Call him in: such Broomes are welcome to me, that ore' flows such liquor: ah
ha, Mistress Ford and Mistress Page, have I encompassed you? go to, via


'Blesse you sir.


And you sir: would you speak with me?


I make bold, to press, with so little preparation upon you.


You Are welcome, what is your will? give us leave Drawer.


Sir, I am a Gentleman that have spent much, my name is Broom.


Good Master Broom, I desire more acquaintance of you.


Good Sir John, I sue for yours: not to charge you, for I must let you
understand, I think my self in better plight for a Lender, then you are: the
which has something emboldned me to this vnseason'd intrusion: for they say,
if money go before, all ways do lie open


Money is a good Soldier (Sir) and will on.


Troth, and I have a bag of money here troubles me: if you will help to bear
it (Sir John) take all, or half, for easing me of the carriage


Sir, I know not how I may deserve to be your Porter.


I will tell you sir, if you will give me the hearing.


Speak (good Master Broom) I shall be glad to be your Servant.


Sir, I hear you are a Scholar: (I will be brief with you) and you have been
a man long known to me, though I had never so good means as desire, to make my
self acquainted with you. I shall discover a thing to you, wherein I must very
much lay open mine own imperfection: but (good Sir John) as you have one eye
upon my follies, as you hear them unfolded, turn another into the Register of
your own, that I may pass with a reproof the easier, since you your self
know how easy it is to be such an offender


Very well Sir, proceed.


There is a Gentlewoman in this Town, her husbands name is Ford.


Well Sir.


I have long loved her, and I protest to you, bestowed much on her: followed
her with a doting observance: Engrossed opportunities to meet her: fee'd
every slight occasion that could but nigardly give me sight of her: not only
bought many presents to give her, but have given largely to many, to know what
she would have given: briefly, I have pursued her, as Love has pursued me,
which has been on the wing of all occasions: but whatsoever I have merited,
either in my mind, or in my means, meede I am sure I have received none,
unless Experience be a Jewel, that I have purchased at an infinite rate, and
that has taught me to say this, " Love like a shadow flies, when substance
Love pursues
" Pursuing that that flies, and flying what pursues.



Have you received no promise of satisfaction at her hands?


Never.


Have you importuned her to such a purpose?


Never.


Of what quality was your love then?


Like a fair house, built on another man's ground, so that I have lost my
edifice, by mistaking the place, where I erected it


To what purpose have you unfolded this to me?


When I have told you that, I have told you all: Some say, that though she
appear honest to me, yet in other places she enlarges her mirth so far,
that there is shrewd construction made of her. Now (Sir John) here is the heart
of my purpose: you are a gentleman of excellent breeding, admirable discourse,
of great admittance, authenticke in your place and person, generally allowed
for your many warlike, court-like, and learned preparations


O Sir.


Believe it, for you know it: there is money, spend it, spend it, spend more;
spend all I have, only give me so much of your time in enchange of it, as to
lay an amiable siege to the honesty of this Fords wife: use your Art of wooing;
win her to consent to you: if any man may, you may as soon as any


Would it apply well to the vehemence of your affection that I should win what
you would enjoy? Methinkes you prescribe to your self very preposterously


O, understand my drift: she dwells so securely on the excellency of her honor,
that the folly of my soul dares not present it self: she is too bright to be
looked against. Now, could I come to her with any detection in my hand; my
desires had instance and argument to commend themselves, I could drive her then
from the ward of her purity, her reputation, her marriage-vow, and a thousand
other her defenses, which now are too-too strongly embattaild against me: what
say you to it, Sir John


Master Broom, I will first make bold with your money: next, give me your
hand: and last, as I am a gentleman, you shall, if you will, enjoy Fords wife


O good Sir.


I say you shall.


Want no money (Sir John) you shall want none.


Want no Mistress Ford (Master Broom) you shall want none: I shall be with
her (I may tell you) by her own appointment, even as you came in to me, her
assistant, or goe-betweene, parted from me: I say I shall be with her between
ten and eleven: for at that time the iealious-rascally-knaue her husband will
be forth: come you to me at night, you shall know how I speed


I am blessed in your acquaintance: do you know Ford Sir?


Hang him (poor Cuckoldly knave) I know him not: yet I wrong him to call him
poor: They say the jealous wittolly-knaue has masses of money, for the which
his wife seems to me well-fauourd: I will use her as the key of the
Cuckoldly-rogues Coffer, and there is my haruest-home


I would you knew Ford, sir, that you might avoid him, if you saw him.


Hang him, mechanicall-salt-butter rogue; I will stare him out of his wits: I
will awe-him with my cudgel: it shall hang like a Meteor ore the Cuckolds
horns: Master Broom, thou shall know, I will predominate over the pezant, and
thou shall lie with his wife. Come to me soon at night: Ford's a knave, and I
will aggrauate his style: thou (Master Broom) shall know him for knave, and
Cuckold. Come to me soon at night


What a damned Epicurian-Rascall is this? my heart is ready to crack with
impatience: who says this is improuident jealousy? my wife has sent to him,
the hour is fixed, the match is made: would any man have thought this? see the
hell of having a false woman: my bed shall be abused, my Coffers ransacked, my
reputation gnawne at, and I shall not only receive this villainous wrong, but
stand under the adoption of abominable terms, and by him that does me this
wrong: Terms, names: Amaimon sounds well: Lucifer, well: Barbason, well: yet
they are Devils additions, the names of fiends: But Cuckold, Wittoll, Cuckold?
the Devil himself has not such a name. Page is an Ass, a secure Ass; he
will trust his wife, he will not be jealous: I will rather trust a Fleming
with my butter, Parson Hugh the Welshman with my Cheese, an Irishman with my
Aqua-vitae-bottle, or a Thief to walk my ambling gelding, then my wife with
her self. Then she plots, then she ruminates, then she devises: and what
they think in their hearts they may effect; they will break their hearts but
they will effect. Heaven be praised for my jealousy: eleven of clock the
hour, I will prevent this, detect my wife, be revenged on Falstaff, and
laugh at Page. I will about it, better three hours too soon, then a mynute
too late: fie, fie, fie: Cuckold, Cuckold, Cuckold


Sir.


Vat is the clock, Jack.


It Is past the hour (Sir) that Sir Hugh promised to meet.


By gar, he has save his soul, dat he is no-come: he has pray his Pible well,
dat he is no-come: by gar (Jack Rugby) he is dead already, if he be come


He is wise Sir: he knew your worship would kill him if he came.


By gar, de herring is no dead, so as I will kill him: take your Rapier,
(Jack) I will tell you how I will kill him


Alas sir, I cannot fence.


Villainy, take your Rapier.


Forbear: here is company.


'Blesse thee, bully-Doctor.


'Saue you Mr. Doctor Caius.


Now, good Mr. Doctor.


'Giue you good morrow, sir.


Vat be all you one, two, tree, four, come for?


To see thee fight, to see thee foigne, to see thee trauerse, to see thee
here, to see thee there, to see thee pass thy puncto, thy flock, thy reuerse,
thy distance, thy montant: Is he dead, my Ethiopian? Is he dead, my Francisco?
ha Bully? what says my Esculapius? my Galien? my heart of Elder? ha? is he
dead bully-Stale? is he dead


By gar, he is de Coward-Iack-Priest of de vorld: he is not show his face.


Thou art a Castalion-king-Vrinall: Hector of Greece (my Boy)


I pray you bear witness, that me have stay, six or seven, two tree hours
for him, and he is nocome


He is the wiser man (M. Docto) the is a curer of souls, and you a curer of
bodies: if you should fight, you go against the hair of your professions: is
it not true, Master Page


Master Shallow; you have your self been a great fighter, though now a man of
peace


Body-kins M. Page, though I now be old, and of the peace; if I see a sword
out, my finger itches to make one: though we are Justices, and Doctors, and
Churchmen (M. Page) we have some salt of our youth in us, we are the sons of
women (M. Page.


It Is true, Mr. Shallow.


It will be found so, (M. Page:) M. Doctor Caius, I am come to fetch you home: I
am sworn of the peace: you have showed your self a wise Physician, and Sir
Hugh has shown himself a wise and patient Churchman: you must go with me,
M. Doctor


Pardon, Guest-Iustice; a Mounseur: Mocke-water.


Mock-vater? vat is dat?


Mock-water, in our English tongue, is Valor (Bully.)


By gar, then I have as much Mock-vater as de Englishman:
scuruy-Iack-dog-Priest: by gar, me vill cut his ears


He will Clapper-claw thee tightly (Bully.)


Clapper-de-claw? vat is dat?


That is, he will make thee amends.


By-gar, me do look he shall clapper-de-claw me, for by-gar, me vill have it.


And I will provoke him to it, or let him wag.


Me tanck you for dat.


And moreover, (Bully) but first, Mr. Ghuest, and M. Page, and eeke Caualeiro
Slender, go you through the Town to Frogmore


Sir Hugh is there, is he?


He is there, see what humor he is in: and I will bring the Doctor about by the
Fields: will it do well


We will do it.


Adieu, good M. Doctor.


By-gar, me vill kill de Priest, for he speak for a Iack-an-Ape to Anne Page.


Let him die: sheath thy impatience: throw cold water on thy Choler: go about
the fields with me through Frogmore, I will bring thee where Mistress Anne Page
is, at a Farm-house a Feasting: and thou shall woo her: Cride-game, said I
well


By-gar, me dancke you vor dat: by gar I love you: and I shall procure 'a you
de good Guest: de Earl, de Knight, de Lords, de Gentlemen, my patients


For the which, I will be thy adversary toward Anne Page: said I well?


By-gar, it is good: vell said.


Let us wag then.


Come at my heels, Jack Rugby.


I pray you now, good Master Slenders seruing-man, and friend Simple by your
name; which way have you looked for Master Caius, that calls himself Doctor of
Physic


Marry Sir, the pittie-ward, the Parke-ward: every way: old Windsor way, and
every way but the Towne-way


I most fehemently desire you, you will also look that way.


I will sir.


'Plesse my soul: how full of Chollors I am, and trempling of mind: I shall
be glad if he have deceived me: how melancholies I am? I will knog his Vrinalls
about his knaves costard, when I have good oportunities for the orke: 'Plesse
my soul: To shallow Ruiers to whose falls: melodious Birds sings Madrigalls:
There will we make our Peds of Roses: and a thousand fragrant posies. To
shallow: 'Mercie on me, I have a great dispositions to cry. Melodious birds
sing Madrigalls: -- When as I sat in Pabilon: and a thousand vagram Posies. To
shallow, etc


Yonder he is coming, this way, Sir Hugh.


He Is welcome: To shallow Rivers, to whose falls:
Heaven prosper the right: what weapons is he?

No weapons, Sir: there comes my Master, Mr. Shallow, and another Gentleman;
from Frogmore, over the style, this way


Pray you give me my gown, or else keep it in your arms.


How now Master Parson? good morrow good Sir Hugh: keep a Gamester from the
dice, and a good Studient from his book, and it is wonderful


Ah sweet Anne Page.


'Saue you, good Sir Hugh.


'Plesse you from his mercy-sake, all of you.


What? the Sword, and the Word?
Do you study them both, Mr. Parson?

And youthful still, in your doublet and hose, this raw-rumaticke day?


There is reasons, and causes for it.


We are come to you, to do a good office, Mr. Parson.


Fery-well: what is it?


Yonder is a most reverend Gentleman; who (be-like) having received wrong by
some person, is at most odds with his own gravity and patience, that ever you
saw


I have lived foure-score years, and upward: I never heard a man of his place,
gravity, and learning, so wide of his own respect


What is he?


I think you know him: Mr. Doctor Caius the renowned French Physician.


Got's-will, and his passion of my heart: I had as lief you would tell me of a
mess of porredge


Why?


He has no more knowledge in Hibocrates and Galen, and he is a knave besides:
a cowardly knave, as you would desires to be acquainted withal


I warrant you, he is the man should fight with him.


O sweet Anne Page.


It appears so by his weapons: keep them asunder: here comes Doctor Caius.


Nay good Mr. Parson, keep in your weapon.


So do you, good Mr. Doctor.


Disarme them, and let them question: let them keep their limbs whole, and
hack our English


I pray you let-a-mee speak a word with your ear; vherefore vill you not
meet-a me


Pray you use your patience in good time.


By-gar, you are de Coward: de Jack dog: John Ape.


Pray you let us not be laughing-stocks to other men's humors: I desire you in
friendship, and I will one way or other make you amends: I will knog your
Vrinal about your knaves Cogs-combe


Diablo: Jack Rugby: mine Host de Iarteer: have I not stay for him, to kill
him? have I not at deplace I did appoint


As I am a Christians-soule, now look your: this is the place appointed, I Will
be judgment by mine Host of the Garter


Peace, I say, Gallia and Gaul, French and Welsh, Soule-Curer, and Body-Curer.


I, dat is very good, excellant.


Peace, I say: hear mine Host of the Garter, Am I politi^ke? Am I subtle? Am I
a Machiuell

Shall I loose my Doctor? No, he gives me the Potions and the Motions. Shall I
loose my Parson? my Priest? my Sir Hugh? No, he gives me the Proverbs, and the
No-verbes. Give me thy hand (Celestial) so: Boys of Art, I have deceived you
both: I have directed you to wrong places: your hearts are mighty, your skins
are whole, and let burned Sack be the issue: Come, lay their swords to pawn:
Follow me, Lad of peace, follow, follow, follow


Trust me, a mad Host: follow Gentlemen, follow.


O sweet Anne Page.


Have do I perceive dat? Have you make-a-de-sot of us, ha, ha?


This is well, he has made us his vlowting-stog: I desire you that we may be
friends: and let us knog our praines together to be revenge on this same scall
scuruy-cogging-companion the Host of the Garter


By gar, with all my heart: he promise to bring me where is Anne Page: by gar
he deceive me too


Well, I will smite his noddles: pray you follow.


Nay keep your way (little Gallant) you were wont to be a follower, but now
you are a Leader: whether had you rather lead mine eyes, or eye your masters
heels


I had rather (forsooth) go before you like a man, then follow him like a
dwarf


O you are a flattering boy, now I see you will be a Courtier.


Well met mistress Page, whether go you.


Truly Sir, to see your wife, is she at home?


I, and as idle as she may hang together for want of company: I think if your
husbands were dead, you two would marry


Be sure of that, two other husbands.


Where had you this pretty weather-cocke?


I cannot tell what (the dickens) his name is my husband had him of, what do
you call your Knights name sirrah


Sir. John Falstaff.


Sir. John Falstaff.


He, he, I can never hit on's name; there is such a league between my goodman,
and he: is your Wife at home indeed


Indeed she is.


By your leave sir, I am sick till I see her.


Has Page any brains? Has he any eyes? Has he any thinking? Sure they
sleep, he has no use of them: why this boy will carry a letter twenty mile
as easy, as a Canon will shoot point-blanke twelve score: he pieces out his
wives inclination; he gives her folly motion and advantage; and now she is going
to my wife, and Falstaffes boy with her: A man may hear this shower sing in
the wind; and Falstaffes boy with her: good plots, they are laid, and our
revolted wives share damnation together. Well, I will take him, then torture my
wife, pluck the borrowed veil of modesty from the so-seeming Mist. Page,
divulge Page himself for a secure and wilful Acteon, and to these violent
proceedings all my neighbors shall cry aim. The clock gives me my Qu, and my
assurance bids me search, there I shall find Falstaff: I shall be rather
praisd for this, then mocked, for it is as possitiue, as the earth is firm,
that Falstaff is there: I will go


Page, etc. Well met Mr Ford.


Trust me, a good knotte; I have good cheer at home, and I pray you all go
with me


I must excuse my self Mr Ford.


And so must I Sir,
We have appointed to dine with Mistress Anne,
And I would not break with her for more money
Then I Will speak of.

We have lingered about a match between An Page, and my cozen Slender, and
this day we shall have our answer


I hope I have your good will Father Page.


You have Mr Slender, I stand wholly for you,
But my wife (Mr Doctor) is for you altogether.

I be-gar, and de Maid is loue-a-me: my nursha-Quickly tell me so mush


What say you to young Mr Fenton? He capers, he dances, he has eyes of youth: he
writes verses, he speaks holliday, he smells April and May, he will carry't, he
will carry't, it is in his buttons, he will carry't


Not by my consent I promise you. The Gentleman is of no having, he kept
company with the wild Prince, and Pointz: he is of too high a Region, he
knows too much: no, he shall not knit a knot in his fortunes, with the finger
of my substance: if he take her, let him take her simply: the wealth I have
waits on my consent, and my consent goes not that way


I beseech you heartily, some of you go home with me to dinner: besides your
cheer you shall have sport, I will show you a monster: Mr Doctor, you shall go,
so shall you Mr Page, and you Sir Hugh


Well, fare you well:
We shall have the freer woing at Mr. Pages.

Go home John Rugby, I come anon.


Farewell my hearts, I will to my honest Knight Falstaff, and drink Canarie
with him


I think I shall drink in Pipe-wine first with him, I Will make him dance. Will
you go, Gentles


Have with you, to see this Monster.


What John, what Robert.


Quickly, quickly: Is the Buck-basket --


I warrant. What Robin I say.


Come, come, come.


Here, set it down.


Give your men the charge, we must be brief.


Marry* as I told you before ( John and Robert) be ready here hard-by in the
Brew House, and when I suddenly call you, come forth, and (without any pause,
or staggering) take this basket on your shoulders: yt done, trudge with it in
all have, and carry it among the Whitsters in Dotchet Mead, and there empty it
in the muddie ditch, close by the Thames side


You will do it?


I ha told them over and over, they lack no direction
Be gone, and come when you are called.

Here comes little Robin.


How now my Eyas-Musket, what news with you?


My M. Sir John is come in at your back door (Mist. Ford, and requests your
company


You little Iack-a-lent, have you bin true to us


I, I Will be sworn: my Master knows not of your being here: and has threatened
to put me into everlasting liberty, if I tell you of it: for he swears he will
turn me away


You Are a good boy: this secrecy of thine shall be a Tailor to thee, and shall
make thee a new doublet and hose. I Will go hide me


Do so: go tell thy Master, I am alone: Mistress Page, remember you your Qu.


I warrant thee, if I do not act it, hiss me.


Go-too then: we will use this unwholesome humidity, this grosse-watry Pumpion;
we'll teach him to know Turtles from Iayes


Have I caught thee, my heavenly Jewel? Why now let me die, for I have lived
long enough: This is the period of my ambition: O this blessed hour


O sweet Sir John.


Mistress Ford, I cannot cog, I cannot prate (Mist. Ford) now shall I sin in my
wish; I would thy Husband were dead, I Will speak it before the best Lord, I
would make thee my Lady


I your Lady Sir John? Alas, I should be a pitiful Lady.


Let the Court of France show me such another: I see how thine eye would
emulate the Diamond: Thou have the right arched-beauty of the brow, that
becomes the Ship-tyre, the Tyre-valiant, or any Tire of Venetian admittance


A plain Kerchiefe, Sir John:
My brows become nothing else, nor that well neither.

Thou art a tyrant to say so: thou would make an absolute Courtier, and the
firm fixture of thy foot, would give an excellent motion to thy gate, in a
semicircled Farthingale. I see what thou were if Fortune thy foe, were not
Nature thy friend: Come, thou can not hide it


Believe me, there is no such thing in me.


What made me love thee? Let that persuade thee. There Is something extraordinary
in thee: Come, I cannot cog, and say thou art this and that, like a-manie of
these lisping-hauthorne buds, that come like women in men's apparel, and smell
like. Bucklers-berry in simple time: I cannot, but I love thee, none but thee;
and thou deseru'st it


Do not betray me sir, I fear you love M. Page.


Thou might as well say, I love to walk by the Counter-gate, which is as
hateful to me, as the reeke of a Lime-kill


Well, heaven knows how I love you,
And you shall one day find it.

Keep in that mind, I Will deserve it.


Nay, I must tell you, so you do;
Or else I could not be in that mind.

Mistress Ford, Mistress Ford: here is Mistress Page at the door, sweating, and
blowing, and looking wildely, and would needs speak with you presently


She shall not see me, I will ensconce me behind the Arras.


Pray you do so, she is a very tatling woman. What Is the matter? How now?


O mistress Ford what have you done?
You Are shamed, y' are overthrown, y' are undone for ever.

What Is the matter, good mistress Page?


O weladay, mist. Ford, having an honest man to your husband, to give him such
cause of suspicion


What cause of suspicion?


What cause of suspicion? Out upon you:
How am I mistook in you?

Why (alas) what is the matter?


Your husband's coming hither (Woman) with all the Officers in Windsor, to
search for a Gentleman, that he says is here now in the house; by your
consent to take an ill advantage of his absence: you are undone


It Is not so, I hope.


Pray heaven it be not so, that you have such a man here: but it is most
certain your husband's coming, with half Windsor at his heels, to search for
such a one, I come before to tell you: If you know your self clear, why I am
glad of it: but if you have a friend here, convey, convey him out. Be not
amazed, call all your senses to you, defend your reputation, or bid farewell to
your good life for ever


What shall I do? There is a Gentleman my dear friend: and I fear not mine
own shame so much, as his peril. I had rather then a thousand pound he were
out of the house


For shame, never stand (you had rather, and you had rather:) your husband's
here at hand, bethink you of some conueyance: in the house you cannot hide
him. Oh, how have you deceived me? Look, here is a basket, if he be of any
reasonable stature, he may creep in here, and throw foul linen upon him, as
if it were going to bucking: Or it is whiting time, send him by your two men to
Datchet-Meade


He Is too big to go in there: what shall I do?


Let me see it, let me see it, O let me see it:
I Will in, I Will in: Follow your friends counsel, I Will in.

What Sir John Faistasse? Are these your Letters, Knight?


I love thee, help me away: let me creep in here: i will never --


Help to cover your master (Boy:) Call your men (Mist. Ford.) You dissembling
Knight


What John, Robert, John; Go, take up these clothes here, quickly: Where Is the
Cowle-staffe? Look how you drumble? Carry them to the Landresse in Datchet
mead: quickly, come


'Pray you come nere: if I suspect without cause,
Why then make sport at me, then let me be your jest,
I deserve it: How now? Whether bear you this?

To the Landresse forsooth?


Why, what have you to do whether they bear it? You were best meddle with
buck-washing


Bucke I would I could wash my self of ye Buck:
Bucke, bucke, bucke, I bucke: I warrant you Bucke,
And of the season too; it shall appear.
Gentlemen, I have dreamed to night, I Will tell you my dream: here, here,
here be my keys, ascend my Chambers, search, seek, find out: I Will warrant
we will vnkennell the Fox. Let me stop this way first: so, now vncape


Good master Ford, be contented:
You wrong your self too much.

True (master Page) up Gentlemen,
You shall see sport anon:
Follow me Gentlemen.

This is fery fantastical humors and iealousies.


By gar, it is no-the fashion of France:
It is not jealous in France.

Nay follow him (Gentlemen) see the issue of his search.


Is there not a double excellency in this?


I know not which pleases me better,
That my husband is deceived, or Sir John.

What a taking was he in, when your husband asked who was in the basket?


I am half afraid he will have need of washing: so throwing him into the
water, will do him a benefit


Hang him dishonest rascal: I would all of the same strain, were in the same
distress


I think my husband has some special suspicion of Falstaffs being here: for
I never saw him so gross in his jealousy till now


I will lay a plot to try that, and we will yet have more tricks with
Falstaff: his dissolute disease will scarce obey this medicine


Shall we send that foolishion Carrion, Mist. Quickly to him, and excuse his
throwing into the water, and give him another hope, to betray him to another
punishment


We will do it: let him be sent for to morrow eight a clock to have amends.


I cannot find him: may be the knave bragged of that he could not compass.


Heard you that?


You use me well, M. Ford? Do you?


I, I do so.


Heaven make you better then your thoghts


Amen.


You do your self mighty wrong (M. Ford)


I, I: I must bear it.


If there be any pody in the house, and in the chambers, and in the coffers,
and in the presses: heaven forgive my sins at the day of judgment


Be gar, nor I too: there is no-bodies.


Fie, fie, M. Ford, are you not ashamed? What spirit, what devil suggests this
imagination? I would not ha your distemper in this kind, for ye wealth of Windsor
castle


It Is my fault (M. Page) I suffer for it.


You suffer for a pad conscience: your wife is as honest a of man's, as I will
desires among five thousand, and five hundred too


By gar, I see it is an honest woman.


Well, I promisd you a dinner: come, come, walk in the Park, I pray you pardon
me: I will hereafter make known to you why I have done this. Come wife, come
Mi. Page, I pray you pardon me. Pray hartly pardon me


Let Us go in Gentlemen, but (trust me) we will mock him: I do inuit you to
morrow morning to my house to breakfast: after we'll a Birding together, I have
a fine Hawke for the bush. Shall it be so


Any thing.


If there is one, I shall make two in the Company


If there be one, or two, I shall make-a-theturd.


Pray you go, M. Page.


I pray you now remembrance to morrow on the lousy knave, mine Host.


Dat is good by gar, withal my heart.


A lousy knave, to have his gibes, and his mockeries.


I see I cannot get thy Fathers love,
Therefore no more turn me to him (sweet Nan.)

Alas, how then?


Why thou must be thy self.
He does object, I am too great of birth,
And that my state being galled with my expense,
I seek to heal it only by his wealth.
Besides these, other bars he lays before me,
My Riots past, my wild Societies,
And tells me it is a thing impossible
I should love thee, but as a property.

May be he tells you true.
No, heaven so speed me in my time to come,
Albeit I will confess, thy Fathers wealth
Was the first motive that I wooed thee (Anne:)
Yet wooing thee, I found thee of more value
Then stampes in Gold, or sums in sealed bags:
And it is the very riches of thy self,
That now I aim at.

Gentle M. Fenton,
Yet seek my Fathers love, still seek it sir,
If opportunity and humblest suite
Cannot attain it, why then hark you hither.

Break their talk Mistress Quickly,
My Kinsman shall speak for himself.

I Will make a shaft or a bolt on it, slid, it is but venturing.


Be not dismayed.


No, she shall not dismay me:
I care not for that, but that I am affeard.

Hark ye, M. Slender would speak a word with you


I come to him. This is my Fathers choice:
O what a world of vilde ill-fauour'd faults
Looks handsome in three hundred pounds a year?

And how does good Master Fenton?
Pray you a word with you.

She Is coming; to her Coz:
O boy, thou had a father.

I had a father (M. An) my uncle can tell you good jests of him: pray you Uncle
tell Mist. Anne the jest how my Father stole two Geese out of a Pen, good Uncle


Mistress Anne, my Cozen loves you.


I that I do, as well as I love any woman in Glocestershire.


He will maintain you like a Gentlewoman.


I that I will, come cut and long-taile, under the degree of a Squire.


He will make you a hundred and fifty pounds ioynture.


Good Master Shallow let him woo for himself.


Marry I thank you for it: I thank you for that good comfort: she calls you
(Coz) I Will leave you


Now Master Slender.


Now good Mistress Anne.


What is your will?


My will? Odd's-hart-lings, that is a pretty jest indeed: I never made my Will
yet (I thank Heaven:) I am not such a sickely creature, I give Heaven praise


I mean (M. Slender) what would you with me?


Truly, for mine own part, I would little or nothing with you: your father
and my uncle has made motion,: if it be my luck, so; if not, happy man be
his dole, they can tell you how things go, better then I can: you may ask your
father, here he comes


Now Mr Slender; Love him daughter Anne.
Why how now? What does Mr Fenter here?
You wrong me Sir, thus still to haunt my house.
I told you Sir, my daughter is disposd of.

Nay Mr Page, be not impatient.


Good M. Fenton* come not to my child.


She is no match for you.


Sir, will you hear me?


No, good M. Fenton.
Come M. Shallow: Come son Slender, in;
Knowing my mind, you wrong me (M. Fenton.)

Speak to Mistress Page.


Good Mist. Page, for that I love your daughter
In such a righteous fashion as I do,
Perforce, against all checkes, rebukes, and manners,
I must advance the colors of my love,
And not retire. Let me have your good will.

Good mother, do not marry me to yond fool.


I mean it not, I seek you a better husband.


That Is my master, M. Doctor.


Alas I had rather be set quick in th earth,
And bowl'd to death with Turnips.

Come, trouble not your self good M.
Fenton, I will not be your friend, nor enemy:
My daughter will I question how she loves you,
And as I find her, so am I affected:
Till then, farewell Sir, she must needs go in,
Her father will be angry.

Farewell gentle Mistress: farewell Nan.


This is my doing now: Nay, said I, will you cast away your child on a Fool,
and a Physician: Look on M. Fenton, this is my doing


I thank thee: and I pray thee once to night,
Give my sweet Nan this Ring: there is for thy pains.

Now heaven send thee good fortune, a kind heart he has: a woman would run
through fire and water for such a kind heart. But yet, I would my Master had
Mistress Anne, or I would M. Slender had her: or (in sooth) I would M. Fenton
had her; I will do what I can for them all three, for so I have promisd, and
I Will be as good as my word, but speciously for M. Fenton. Well, I must of
another errand to Sir John Falstaff from my two Mistresses: what a beast am I
to slack it


Bardolfe I say.


Here Sir.


Go, fetch me a quart of Sack, put a tossed in it. Have I lived to be carried in
a Basket like a barrow of butchers Offall? and to be thrown in the Thames?
Well, if I be served such another trick, I Will have my brains 'tane out and
buttered, and give them to a dog for a New-yeares gift. The rogues slighted
me into the river with as little remorse, as they would have drown'de a blind
bitches Puppies, fifteen in th litter: and you may know by my size, that I
have a kind of alacrity in sinking: if the bottom were as deep as hell, I
should down. I had been drowned, but that the shore was sheluy and shallow: a
death that I abhor: for the water swelles a man; and what a thing should I
have been, when I had been swelled? I should have been a Mountain of Mummie


Here Is M. Quickly Sir to speak with you.


Come, let me pour in some Sack to the Thames water: for my bellies as cold as
if I had swallowed snowbals, for pills to cool the reins. Call her in


Come in woman.


By your leave: I cry you mercy?
Give your worship good morrow.

Take away these Challices:
Go, brew me a pottle of Sack finely.

With Eggs, Sir?


Simple of it self: I Will no Pullet-Spersme in my brewage. How now?


Marry Sir, I come to your worship from M. Ford.


Mist. Ford? I have had Ford enough: I was thrown into the Ford; I have my
belly full of Ford


Alas the day, (good-heart) that was not her fault: she does so take on with
her men; they mistook their erection


So did I mine, to build upon a foolish Woman's promise.


Well, she laments Sir for it, that it would yern your heart to see it: her
husband goes this morning a birding; she desires you once more to come to her,
between eight and nine: I must carry her word quickly, she will make you amends
I warrant you


Well, I will visit her, tell her so: and bid her think what a man is: Let
her consider his frailety, and then judge of my merit


I will tell her.


Do so. Between nine and ten say thou?


Eight and nine Sir.


Well, be gone: I will not miss her.


Peace be with you Sir.


I marvel I hear not of Mr Broom: he sent me word to stay within: I like
his money well. Oh, here be comes


Bless you Sir.


Now M. Broom, you come to know
What has past between me, and Fords wife.

That indeed (Sir John) is my business.


M. Broom I will not lie to you,
I was at her house the hour she appointed me.

And sped you Sir?


very ill-fauouredly M. Broom.


How so sir, did she change her determination?


No (M. Broom) but the peaking Curnuto her husband (M. Broom) dwelling in a
continual larum of jealousy, coms me in the instant of our encounter, after we
had embrast, kissed, protested, and (as it were) spoke the prologue of our
Comedy: and at his heels, a rabble of his companions, thither provoked and
instigated by his distemper, and (forsooth) to search his house for his wives
Love


What? While you were there?


While I was there.


And did he search for you, and could not find you?


You shall hear. As good luck would have it, comes in one Mist. Page* gives
intelligence of Fords approach: and in her invention, and Fords wives
distraction, they conuey'd me into a bucke-basket


A Buck-basket?


Yes: a Buck-basket: ram'd me in with foul Shirts and Smockes, Socks, foul
Stockings, greasy Napkins, that (Master Broom) there was the rankest compound
of villainous smell, that ever offended nostrill


And how long lay you there?


Nay, you shall hear (Master Broom) what I hau^ sufferd, to bring this woman
to evil, for your good: Being thus crammed in the Basket, a couple of Fords
knaves, his Hindes, were called forth by their Mistress, to carry me in the name
of foul Clothes to Datchet-lane: they took me on their shoulders: met the
jealous knave their Master in the door; who asked them once or twice what they
had in their Basket? I quaked for fear least the Lunatique Knave would have
searched it: but Fate (ordaining he should be a Cuckold) held his hand: well,
on went he, for a search, and away went I for foul Clothes: But mark the
sequel (Master Broom) I suffered the pangs of three several deaths: First,
an intolerable fright, to be detected with a iealious rotten Bell-weather:
Next to be compassed like a good Bilbo in the circumference of a Pecke, hilt to
point, heel to head. And then to be stopped in like a strong distillation with
stinking Clothes, that fretted in their own grease: think of that, a man of
my Kidney; think of that, that am as subject to heat as butter; a man of
continual dissolution, and thaw: it was a miracle to escape suffocation. And in
the height of this Bath (when I was more then half stewed in grease (like a
Dutchdish) to be thrown into the Thames, and coold, glowing-hot, in that serge
like a Horseshoo; think of that; hissing hot: think of that (Master Broom.


In good sadness Sir, I am sorry, that for my sake you have sufferd all this.
My suite then is desperate: You Will undertake her no more?

Master Broom: I will be thrown into Etna, as I have been into Thames, ere I
will leave her thus; her Husband is this morning gone a Birding: I have
received from her another ambassie of meeting: 'twixt eight and nine is the
hour (Master Broom.


It Is past eight already Sir.


Is it? I will then address me to my appointment: Come to me at your
convenient leisure, and you shall know how I speed: and the conclusion shall
be crowned with your enjoying her: adieu: you shall have her (Master Broom)
Master Broom, you shall cuckold Ford


Hum: ha? Is this a vision? Is this a dream? do I sleep? Master Ford awake,
awake Master Ford: there is a hole made in your best coat (Master Ford:) this
it is to be married; this it is to have Lynnen, and Buck-baskets: Well, I will
proclaim my self what I am: I will now take the Leacher: he is at my house:
he cannot escape me: it is impossible he should: he cannot creep into a
halfe-penny purse, nor into a Pepper-Boxe: But least the Devil that guides
him, should aid him, I will search impossible places: though what I am, I
cannot avoid; yet to be what I would not, shall not make me tame: If I have
horns, to make one mad, let the proverb go with me, I Will be hornemad


Is he at M. Fords already think thou?


Sure he is by this; or will be presently; but truly he is very courageous
mad, about his throwing into the water. Mistress Ford desires you to come
suddenly


I Will be with her by and by: I Will but bring my yong-man here to School: look
where his Master comes; it is a playing day I see: how now Sir Hugh, no School
to day


No: Master Slender is let the Boys leave to play.


'Blessing of his heart.


Sir Hugh, my husband says my son profits nothing in the world at his Book:
I pray you ask him some questions in his Accidence


Come hither William; hold up your head; come.


Come-on Sirrah; hold up your head; answer your Master, be not afraid.


William, how many Numbers is in Nownes?


Two.


Truly, I thought there had bin one Number more, because they say od's-Nownes.


Peace, your tatlings. What is (Fair) William?


Pulcher.


Powlcats? there are fairer things then Powlcats, sure.


You are a very simplicity of man: I pray you peace. What is (Lapis) William?


A Stone.


And what is a Stone (William?)


A Peeble.


No; it is Lapis: I pray you remember in your praine.


Lapis.


That is a good William: what is he (William) that does lend Articles.


Articles are borrowed of the Pronoune; and be thus declined. Singulariter
nominatiuo hic haec, hoc


Nominatiuo hig, hag, hog: pray you mark: genitiuo huius: Well: what is your
Accusatiue-case


Accusatiuo hinc.


I pray you have your remembrance (child) Accusatiuo hing, hang, hog.


Hang-hog, is latten for Bacon, I warrant you.


Leave your prables (of man) What is the Focatiue case (William?)


O, Vocatiuo, O.


Remember William, Focatiue, is caret.


And that is a good root.


OF man, forbear.


Peace.


What is your Genitive case plural (William?)


Genitive case?


I.


Genitive horum, harum, horum.


'Vengeance of Ginyes case; fie on her; never name her (child) if she be a
whore


For shame of man.


You do ill to teach the child such words: he teaches him to hic, and to
hac; which they will do fast enough of themselves, and to call horum; fie upon
you


OF man, art thou Lunaties? Have thou no understandings for thy Cases, and the
numbers of the Genders? Thou art as foolish Christian creatures, as I would
desires


Prithee hold thy peace.


Show me now (William) some declensions of your Pronounes.


Forsooth, I have forgot.


It is Qui, que, quod; if you forget your Quies, your Ques, and your Quods, you
must be preeches: Go your ways and play, go


He is a better scholar then I thought he was.


He is a good sprag-memory: Farewell Mis. Page.


Adieu good Sir Hugh:
Get you home boy, Come we stay too long.

Mi. Ford, Your sorrow has eaten up my sufferance; I see you are obsequious in
your love, and I profess requital to a hairs breadth, not only Mist. Ford,
in the simple office of love, but in all the accustrement, complement, and
ceremony of it: But are you sure of your husband now


He Is a birding (sweet Sir John.)


What hoa, gossip Ford: what hoa.


Step into the chamber, Sir John.


How now (sweet heart) whose at home besides your self?


Why none but mine own people.


Indeed?


No certainly: Speak louder.


Truly, I am so glad you have no body here.


Why?


Why woman, your husband is in his old lines again: he so takes on yonder
with my husband, so railes against all married mankind; so curses all Eues
daughters, of what complexion soever; and so buffettes himself on the
for-head: crying peere-out, peere-out, that any madness I ever yet beheld,
seemed but tamenesse, ciuility, and patience to this his distemper he is in
now: I am glad the fat Knight is not here


Why, does he talk of him?


Of none but him, and swears he was carried out the last time he searched for
him, in a Basket: Protests to my husband he is now here, and has drawn him
and the rest of their company from their sport, to make another experiment of
his suspicion: But I am glad the Knight is not here; now he shall see his own
foolerie


How near is he Mistress Page?


Hard by, at street end; he will be here anon.


I am undone, the Knight is here.


Why then you are utterly shamed, and he is but a dead man. What a woman are
you? Away with him, away with him* Better shame, then murder


Which way should he go? How should I bestow him? Shall I put him into the
basket again


No, I Will come no more in th Basket:
May I not go out ere he come?

Alas: three of Mr. Fords brothers watch the door with Pistols, that none
shall issue out: otherwise you might slip away ere he came: But what make you
here


What shall I do? I Will creep up into the chimney.


There they always use to discharge their Birding-peeces: creep into the
Kill-hole


Where is it?


He will seek there on my word: Neither Press, Coffer, Chest, Trunk, Well,
Vault, but he has an abstract for the remembrance of such places, and goes to
them by his Note: There is no hiding you in the house


I Will go out then.


If you go out in your own semblance, you die Sir John, unless you go out
disguised


How might we disguise him?


Alas the day I know not, there is no woman's gown big enough for him:
otherwise he might put on a hat, a muffler, and a kerchiefe, and so escape


Good hearts, devise something: any extremity, rather then a mischief.


My Maids Aunt the fat woman of Brainford, has a gown above.


On my word it will serve him: she is as big as he is: and there is her thrum'd
hat, and her muffler too: run up Sir John


Go, go, sweet Sir John: Mistriis Page and I will look some linen for your
head


Quick, quick, we will come dress you straight: put on the gown the while.


I would my husband would meet him in this shape: he cannot abide the old
woman of Brainford; he swears she is a witch, forbad her my house, and has
threatened to beat her


Heaven guide him to thy husbands cudgel: and the devil guide his cudgel
afterward


But is my husband coming?


I in good sadness is he, and talks of the basket too, howsoever he has had
intelligence


We Will try that: for I Will appoint my men to carry the basket again, to meet
him at the door with it, as they did last time


Nay, but he will be here presently: let us go dress him like the witch of
Brainford


I Will first direct direct my men, what they shall do with the basket: Go up,
I Will bring linen for him straight


Hang him dishonest Varlet,
We cannot misuse enough:
We'll leave a proof by that which we will do,
Wives may be merry, and yet honest too:
We do not act that often, jest, and laugh,
It Is old, but true, Still Swine eats all the draugh.

Go Sirs, take the basket again on your shoulders: your Master is hard at
door: if he bid you set it down, obey him: quickly, dispatch


Come, come, take it up.


Pray heaven it be not full of Knight again.


I hope not, I had liefe as bear so much lead.


I, but if it prove true (Mr. Page) have you any way then to vnfoole me again.
Set down the basket villain: some body call my wife: Youth in a basket: Oh
you Panderly Rascals, there is a knot: a gin, a pack, a conspiracy against me:
Now shall the devil be shamed. What wife I say: Come, come forth: behold what
honest clothes you send forth to bleaching


Why, this passes M. Ford: you are not to go loose any longer, you must be
pinnion'd


Why, this is Lunaticks: this is mad, as a mad dog.


Indeed M. Ford, thy is not well indeed.


So say I too Sir, come hither Mistress Ford, Mistress Ford, the honest woman,
the modest wife, the virtuous creature, that has the iealious fool to her
husband: I suspect without cause (Mistress) do I


Heaven be my witness you do, if you suspect me in any dishonesty.


Well said Brazon-face, hold it out: Come forth sirrah.


This passes.


Are you not ashamed, let the cloths alone.


I shall find you anon.


It Is unreasonable; will you take up your wives clothes? Come, away.


Empty the basket I say.


Why man, why?


Master Page, as I am a man, there was one conuay'd out of my house yesterday
in this basket: why may not he be there again, in my house I am sure he is: my
Intelligence is true, my jealousy is reasonable, pluck me out all the linen


If you find a man there, he shall dye a Fleas death.


Here Is no man.


By my fidelity this is not well Mr. Ford: This wrongs you.


Mr Ford, you must pray, and not follow the imaginations of your own heart:
this is iealousies


Well, he is not here I seek for.


No, nor no where else but in your brain.


Help to search my house this one time: if I find not what I seek, show no
color for my extremity: Let me for ever be your Table-sport: Let them say of
me, as jealous as Ford, that searched a hollow Wall-nut for his wives Lemman.
Satisfy me once more, once more search with me


What hoa (Mistress Page,) come you and the old woman down: my husband will
come into the Chamber


Old woman? what old woman's that?


Why it is my maids Aunt of Brainford.


A witch, a Queen, an old couzening queen: Have I not forbid her my house.
She comes of errands does she? We are simple men, we do not know what is
brought to pass under the profession of Fortune-telling. She works by
Charms, by Spells, by the Figure, and such dawbry as this is, beyond our
Element: we know nothing. Come down you Witch, you Hagge you, come down I
say


Nay, good sweet husband, good Gentlemen, let him strike the old woman.


Come mother Prat, Come give me your hand.


I Will Prat-her: Out of my door, you Witch, you Ragge, you Baggage, you Poulcat,
you Runnion, out, out: I Will conjure you, I Will fortune-tell you


Are you not ashamed? I think you have killed the poor woman.


Nay he will do it, it is a goodly credit for you.


Hang her witch.


By yea, and no, I think the of man is a witch indeed: I like not when a of
man has a great peard; I spy a great peard under his muffler


Will you follow Gentlemen, I beseech you follow: see but the issue of my
jealousy: If I cry out thus upon no traile, never trust me when I open again


Let Us obey his humor a little further:
Come Gentlemen.

Trust me he beat him most pitifully.


Nay by the Mass that he did not: he beat him most vnpittifully, me thought.


I Will have the cudgel hallowed, and hung ore the Altar, it has done
meritorious service


What think you? May we with the warrant of woman hood, and the witness of a
good conscience, pursue him with any further revenge


The spirit of wantonness is sure scared out of him, if the devil have him
not in fee-simple, with fine and recovery, he will never (I think) in the way
of waste, attempt us again


Shall we tell our husbands how we have served him?


Yes, by all means: if it be but to scrape the figures out of your husbands
brains: if they can find in their hearts, the poor vnuertuous fat Knight
shall be any further afflicted, we two will still be the ministers


I Will warrant, they will have him publicly shamed, and me thinks there would be
no period to the jest, should he not be publicly shamed


Come, to the Forge with it, then shape it:
I would not have things cool.

Sir, the Germane desires to have three of your horses: the Duke himself will
be to morrow at Court, and they are going to meet him


What Duke should that be comes so secretly? I hear not of him in the Court:
let me speak with the Gentlemen, they speak English


I Sir? I Will call him to you.


They shall have my horses, but I Will make them pay: I Will sauce them, they have
had my houses a week at command: I have turned away my other guests, they must
come off, I Will sauce them, come


It Is one of the best discretions of a of man as ever I did look upon.


And did he send you both these Letters at an instant?


Within a quarter of an hour.


Pardon me (wife) henceforth do what you wilt:
I rather will suspect the Sun with gold,
Then thee with wantonness: Now does thy honor stand
(In him that was of late an Heretic)
As firm as faith.

It Is well, it is well, no more:
Be not as extreme in submission, as in offense,
But let our plot go forward: Let our wives
Yet once again (to make us public sport)
Appoint a meeting with this old fat-fellow,
Where we may take him, and disgrace him for it.

There is no better way then that they spoke of.


How? to send him word they will meet him in the Park at midnight? Fie, fie,
he will never come


You say he has bin thrown in the Rivers: and has bin grievously peaten, as an
old of man: me-thinkes there should be terrors in him, that he should not come:
Me-thinkes his flesh is punished, he shall have no desires


So think I too.


Devise but how you will use him when he comes,
And let us two devise to bring him thither.

There is an old tale goes, that Herne the
Hunter (sometime a keeper here in Windsor Forest)
Does all the winter time, at still midnight
Walk round about an Oak, with great rag'd-hornes,
And there he blasts the tree, and takes the cattle,
And make milch-kine yield blood, and shakes a chain
In a most hideous and dreadful manner.
You have heard of such a Spirit, and well you know
The superstitious idle-headed-Eld
Received, and did deliver to our age
This tale of Herne the Hunter, for a truth.

Why yet there want not many that do fear
In deep of night to walk by this Hernes Oak:
But what of this?

Marry this is our devise,
That Falstaff at that Oak shall meet with us.

Well, let it not be doubted but he will come,
And in this shape, when you have brought him thither,
What shall be done with him? What is your plot?

That likewise have we thought upon: and thus:
Nan Page (my daughter) and my little son,
And three or four more of their growth, we will dress
Like Vrchins, Ouphes, and Fairies, green and white,
With rounds of waxen Tapers on their heads,
And rattles in their hands; upon a sudden,
As Falstaff, she, and I, are newly met,
Let them from forth a saw-pit rush at once
With some diffused song: Upon their sight
We two, in great amazedness will fly:
Then let them all encircle him about,
And Fairy-like to pinch the unclean Knight;
And ask him why that hour of Fairy Revel,
In their so sacred paths, he dares to tread
In shape profane.

And till he tell the truth,
Let the supposed Fairies pinch him, sound,
And burn him with their Tapers.

The truth being known,
We'll all present our selves; dis-horne the spirit,
And mock him home to Windsor.

The children must
Be practiced well to this, or they will neu'r do it.

I will teach the children their behauiours: and I will be like a Iacke-an-Apes
also, to burn the Knight with my Taber


That will be excellent,
I Will go buy them vizards.

My Nan shall be the Queen of all the Fairies, finely attired in a robe of
white


That silk will I go buy, and in that time
Shall M. Slender steal my Nan away,
And marry her at Eaton: go, send to Falstaff straight.

Nay, I Will to him again in name of Broom,
He Will tell me all his purpose: sure he will come.

Fear not you that: Go get us properties
And tricking for our Fayries.

Let us about it,
It is admirable pleasures, and ferry honest knaueries.

Go Mist. Ford,
Send quickly to Sir John, to know his mind:
I Will to the Doctor, he has my good will,
And none but he to marry with Nan Page:
That Slender (though well landed) is an Idiot:
And he, my husband best of all affects:
The Doctor is well monied, and his friends
Potent at Court: he, none but he shall have her,
Though twenty thousand worthier come to crave her.

What would thou have? (Boore) what? (thick skin) speak, breathe, discuss:
brief, short, quick, snap


Marry Sir, I come to speak with Sir John Falstaff from M. Slender.


There Is his Chamber, his House, his Castle, his standing-bed and truckle-bed:
it is painted about with the story of the Prodigal, fresh and new: go, knock
and call: he will speak like an Anthropophaginian unto thee: Knock I say


There Is an old woman, a fat woman gone up into his chamber: I Will be so bold as
stay Sir till she come down: I come to speak with her indeed


Ha? A fat woman? The Knight may be robbed: I Will call, Bully-Knight, Bully Sir
John: speak from thy Lungs Military: Art thou there? It is thine Host, thine
Ephesian calls


How now, mine Host?


Here Is a Bohemian-Tartar taries the coming down of thy fat-woman: Let her
descend (Bully) let her descend: my Chambers are honorable: Fie, priuacy? Fie


There was (mine Host) an old-fat-woman even now with me, but she is gone.


Pray you Sir, was it not the Wise-woman of Brainford?


I marry was it (Mussel-shell) what would you with her?


My Master (Sir) my master Slender, sent to her seeing her go thorough the
streets, to know (Sir) whether one Nim (Sir) that beguiled him of a chain, had
the chain, or no


I spoke with the old woman about it.


And what says she, I pray Sir?


Marry she says, that the very same man that beguiled Master Slender of his
Chain, cozon'd him of it


I would I could have spoken with the Woman her self, I had other things to
have spoken with her too, from him


What are they? let us know.


I: come: quick.


I may not conceal them (Sir.)


Conceal them, or thou di'st.


Why sir, they were nothing but about Mistress Anne Page, to know if it were my
Masters fortune to have her, or no


It Is, it is his fortune.


What Sir?


To have her, or no: go; say the woman told me so.


May I be bold to say so Sir?


I Sir: like who more bold.


I thank your worship: I shall make my Master glad with these tidings.


Thou are clearkly: thou art clearkly (Sir John) was there a wise woman with
thee


I that there was (mine Host) one that has taught me more wit, then ever I
learned before in my life: and I paid nothing for it neither, but was paid for
my learning


Out alas (Sir) cozonage: mere cozonage.


Where be my horses? speak well of them varletto.


Run away with the cozoners: for so soon as I came beyond Eaton, they threw me
off, from behind one of them, in a slough of mire; and set spurs, and away;
like three Germane-diuels; three Doctor Faustaffes


They are gone but to meet the Duke (villain) do not say they be fled:
Germans are honest men


Where is mine Host?


What is the matter Sir?


Have a care of your entertainments: there is a friend of mine come to Town,
tells me there is three Cozen-Iermans, that has cozend all the Hosts of
Readins, of Maidenhead; of Cole-brooke, of horses and money: I tell you for
good will (look you) you are wise, and full of gibes, and vlouting-stocks: and
it is not convenient you should be cozoned. Fare you well


Ver' is mine Host de Iarteere?


Here (Master Doctor) in perplexity, and doubtful delemma.


I cannot tell vat is dat: but it is tell-a-me, dat you make grand preparation
for a Duke de Iamanie: by my trot: der is no Duke that the Court is know, to
come: I tell you for good will: adieu


Huy and cry, (villain) go: assist me Knight, I am undone: fly, run: huy, and
cry (villain) I am undone


I would all the world might be cozond, for I have been cozond and beaten too:
if it should come to the ear of the Court, how I have been transformed; and
how my transformation has been washd, and cudgeld, they would melt me out of
my fat drop by drop, and liquor Fishermens-boots with me: I warrant they would
whip me with their fine wits, till I were as crest-falne as a dride-peare: I
never prosper'd, since I forswore my self at Primer^: well, if my wind were
but long enough; I would repent: Now? Whence come you


From the two parties forsooth.


The Devil take one party, and his Dam the other: and so they shall be both
bestowed; I have suffered more for their sakes; more then the villainous
inconstancy of man's disposition is able to bear


And have not they suffered? Yes, I warrant; speciously one of them; Mistress
Ford (good heart) is beaten black and blew, that you cannot see a white spot
about her


What tell thou me of black, and blew? I was beaten my self into all the
colors of the Rainebow: and I was like to be apprehended for the Witch of
Braineford, but that my admirable dexterity of wit, my counterfeiting the
action of an old woman delivered me, the knave Constable had set me in the
Stocks, in the common Stocks, for a Witch


Sir: let me speak with you in your Chamber, you shall hear how things go,
and (I warrant) to your content: here is a Letter will say somewhat:
(good-hearts) what a-doe here is to bring you together? Sure, one of you does
not serve heaven well, that you are so crossed


Come up into my Chamber.


Master Fenton, talk not to me, my mind is heavy: I will give over all.


Yet hear me speak: assist me in my purpose,
And (as I am a gentleman) i will give thee
A hundred pound in gold, more then your loss.

I will hear you (Master Fenton) and I will (at the least) keep your counsel.


From time to time, I have acquainted you
With the dear love I bear to fair Anne Page,
Who, mutually, has answered my affection,
(So far forth, as her self might be her chooser)
Even to my wish; I have a letter from her
Of such contents, as you will wonder at;
The mirth whereof, so larded with my matter,
That neither (singly) can be manifested
Without the show of both: fat Falstaff
Has a great Scene; the image of the jest
I Will show you here at large (hark good mine Host:)
To night at Hernes-Oke, just 'twixt twelve and one,
Must my sweet Nan present the Faerie-Queene:
The purpose why, is here: in which disguise
While other Jests are something rank on foot,
Her father has commanded her to slip
Away with Slender, and with him, at Eaton
Immediately to Marry: She has consented: Now Sir,
Her Mother, (even strong against that match
And firm for Doctor Caius) has appointed
That he shall likewise shuffle her away,
While other sports are tasking of their minds,
And at the Deanery, where a Priest attends
Strait marry her: to this her Mothers plot
She seemingly obedient) likewise has
Made promise to the Doctor: Now, thus it rests,
Her Father means she shall be all in white;
And in that habit, when Slender sees his time
To take her by the hand, and bid her go,
She shall go with him: her Mother has intended
(The better to deuote her to the Doctor;
For they must all be masked, and vizarded)
That quaint in green, she shall be loose en-roab'd,
With Ribonds-pendant, flaring 'bout her head;
And when the Doctor spies his vantage ripe,
To pinch her by the hand, and on that token,
The maid has given consent to go with him.

Which means she to deceive? Father, or Mother.


Both (my good Host) to go along with me:
And here it rests, that you will procure the Vicar
To stay for me at Church, 'twixt twelve, and one,
And in the lawful name of marrying,
To give our hearts united ceremony.

Well, husband your device; I Will to the Vicar,
Bring you the Maid, you shall not lack a Priest.

So shall I evermore be bound to thee;
Besides, I Will make a present recompense.

Prithee no more prattling: go, I Will hold, this is the third time: I hope good
luck lies in odd numbers: Away, go, they say there is Divinity in odd
Numbers, either in nativity, chance, or death: away


I Will provide you a chain, and I Will do what I can to get you a pair of horns.


Away I say, time wears, hold up your head and mince. How now M. Broom?
Master Broom, the matter will be known to night, or never. Be you in the
Park about midnight, at Hernes-Oake, and you shall see wonders


Went you not to her yesterday (Sir) as you told me you had appointed?


I went to her (Master Broom) as you see, like a poore-old-man, but I came
from her (Master Broom) like a poore-old-woman; that same knave ( Ford her
husband) has the sinest mad devil of ^ealousie in him (Master Broom) that
ever governed Frenzy. I will tell you, he beat me grievously, in the shape of
a woman: (for in the shape of Man (Master Broom) I fear not Goliath with a
Weauers beam, because I know also, life is a Shuttle) I am in have, go along
with me, I Will tell you all (Master Broom:) since I plucked Geese, plaide
Trew^nt, and whipped Top, I knew not what 'twas to be beaten, till lately. Follow
me, I Will tell you strange things of this knave Ford, on whom to night I will be
revenged, and I will deliver his wife into your hand. Follow, strange things
in hand (M. Broom) follow


Come, come: we will couch in th Castle-ditch, till we see the light of our
Fairies. Remember son Slender, m


I forsooth, I have spoke with her, and we have a nay-word, how to know one
another. I come to her in white, and cry Mum; she cries Budget, and by that we
know one another


That Is good too: But what needs either your Mum, or her Budget? The white
will decipher her well enough. It has struck ten a'clocke


The night is dark, Light and Spirits will become it well: Heaven prosper our
sport. No man means evil but the devil, and we shall know him by his horns.
Lets away: follow me


Mr Doctor, my daughter is in green, when you see your time, take her by the
hand, away with her to the Deauerie, and dispatch it quickly: go before into
the Park: we two must go together


I know vat I have to do, adieu.


Fare you well (Sir.) my husband will not rejoice so much at the abuse of
Falstaff, as he will chafe at the Doctors marrying my daughter: But it is no
matter; better a little chiding, then a great deal of heartbreake


Where is Nan now? and her troop of Fairies? and the Welch-deuill Herne?


They are all couched in a pit hard by Hernes Oak, with obscured Lights; which
at the very instant of Falstaffes and our meeting, they will at once display to
the night


That cannot choose but amaze him.


If he be not amazed he will be mocked: If he be amazed, he will every way be
mocked


We Will betray him finely.


Against such Lewdsters, and their lechery,
Those that betray them, do no treachery.

The hour drawes-on: to the Oak, to the Oak.


Trib, trib Fairies: Come, and remember your parts: be pold (I pray you) follow
me into the pit, and when I give the watch-'ords, do as I pid you: Come, come,
trib, trib


The Windsor-bell has stroke twelve: the Minute drawes-on: Now the
hot-bloodied-Gods assist me: Remember lou^, thou was it a Bull for thy Europa,
Love set on thy horns. O powerful Love, that in some respects makes a Beast a
Man: in some other, a Man a beast. You were also (Jupiter) a Swan, for the love
of Leda: O omnipotent Love, how nere the God drew to the complexion of a Goose:
a fault done first in the form of a beast, (O Jove, a beastly fault:) and then
another fault, in the semblance of a Foul, think on it (Jove) a fowle-fault.
When Gods have hot backs, what shall poor men do? For me, I am here a
Windsor Stagge, and the fattest (I think) in th Forest. Send me a cool
rut-time (Jove) or who can blame me to piss my Tallow? Who comes here? my Do


Sir John? Art thou there (my Dear?)
My male-Deere?

My Do, with the black Scut? Let the sky rain Potatoes: let it thunder, to
the tune of Greenesleeues, haile-kissing Comfits, and snow Eringoes: Let there
come a tempest of provocation, I will shelter me here


Mistress Page is come with me (sweet heart.)


Divide me like a brib'd-Bucke, each a Haunch: I will keep my sides to my
self, my shoulders for the fellow of this walk; and my horns I bequeath your
husbands. Am I a Woodman, ha? Speak I like Herne the Hunter? Why, now is Cupid
a child of conscience, he makes restitution. As I am a true spirit, welcome


Alas, what noise?


Heaven forgive our sins.


What should this be?


Away, away.


I think the devil will not have me damned,
Least the oil that is in me should set hell on fire;
He would never else cross me thus.

Fairies black, gray, green, and white,
You Moone-shine reuellers, and shades of night.
You Orphan heirs of fixed destiny,
Attend your office, and your quality.
Crier Hob-goblyn, make the Fairy Oyes.

Elues, list your names: Silence you aerie toys.
Cricket, to Windsor-chimnies shall thou leap;
Where fires thou find'st vnrak'd, and hearths unswept,
There pinch the Maids as blew as Bill-berry,
Our radiant Queen, hates Sluts, and Sluttery.

They are Fairies, he that speaks to them shall die,
I Will wink, and couch: No man their works must eye.

Where Is Bid? Go you, and where you find a maid
That ere she sleep has thrice her prayers said,
Raise up the Organs of her fantasy,
Sleep she as sound as careless infancy,
But those as sleep, and think not on their sins,
Pinch them arms, legs, backs, shoulders, sides, and shins.

About, about:
Search Windsor Castle (Elues) within, and out.
Strew good ^k^ (Ouphes) on every sacred room,
That it may stand till the perpetual doom,
In state as wholesome, as in state it is sit,
Worthy the Owner, and the Owner it.
The several Chai^ of Order, took you s^owre
With juice of Balm; and every precious flower,
Each fair Instalment, Coat, and seu'rall Crest,
With loyal Blazon, evermore be blessed.
And Nightly-meadow-Fairies, look you sing
Like to the Garters-Compasse, in a ring,
The expressure that it bears: Green let it be,
Mote fertile-fresh then all the Field to see:
And, Honey Soit Qui Mal-y-Pence, write
In Emrold-tuffes, Flowers purple, blew, and white,
Like Saphire-pearle, and rich embroiderie,
Buckled below fair Knight-hoods bending knee;
Fairies use Flowers for their characterie.
Away, disperse: But till it is one a clock,
Our Dance of Custom, round about the Oak
Of Herne the Hunter, let us not forget.

Pray you lock hand in hand: your selves in order set:
And twenty glow-wormes shall our Lanthornes be
To guide our Measure round about the Tree.
But stay, I smell a man of middle earth.

Heavens defend me from that Welsh Fairy,
Least he transform me to a piece of Cheese.

Vilde worm, thou wast ore-look'd even in thy birth.


With Triall-fire touch me his finger end:
If he be chaste, the flame will back descend
And turn him to no pain: but if he start,
It is the flesh of a corrupted heart.

A trial, come.


Come: will this wood take fire?


Oh, oh, oh.


Corrupt, corrupt, and tainted in desire.
About him (Fairies) sing a scornful rhyme,
And as you trip, still pinch him to your time.

Fie on sinful fantasy* Fie on Lust, and Luxury:
Lust is but a bloody fire, kindled with unchaste desire,
Fed in heart whose flames aspire,
As thoughts do blow them higher and higher.
Pinch him (Fairies) mutually: Pinch him for his villainy.
Pinch him, and burn him, and turn him about,
Till Candles, and Starlight, and Moone-shine be out.

Nay do not fly, I think we have watched you now: Will none but Herne the
Hunter serve your turn


I pray you come, hold up the jest no higher.
Now (good Sir John) how like you Windsor wives?
See you these husband? Do not these fair yoakes
Become the Forest better then the Town?

Now Sir, whose a Cuckold now?
Mr Broom, Falstaffes a Knave, a Cuckoldly knave,
Here are his horns Master Broom:
And Master Broom, he has enjoyed nothing of Fords, but his Buck-basket, his
cudgel, and twenty pounds of money, which must be paid to Mr Broom, his
horses are arrested for it, Mr Broom


Sir John, we have had ill luck: we could never meet: I will never take you
for my Love again, but I will always count you my Dear


I do begin to perceive that I am made an Ass.


I, and an Ox too: both the proofs are extant.


And these are not Fairies* I was three or four times in the thought they were
not Fairies, and yet the guiltiness of my mind, the sudden surprise of my
powers, drove the grossness of the foppery into a received belief, in
despite of the teeth of all rhyme and reason, that they were Fairies. See now
how wit may be made a Iacke-a-Lent, when it is upon ill employment


Sir John Falstaff, serve Got, and leave your desires, and Fairies will not
pinse you


Well said Fairy Hugh.


And leave you your iealouzies too, I pray you.


I will never mistrust my wife again, till thou art able to woo her in good
English


Have I laid my brain in the Sun, and dri'de it, that it wants matter to
prevent so gross ore-reaching as this? Am I ridden with a Welsh Goat too?
Shall I have a Coxcombe of Frize? It Is time I were choked with a piece of
toasted Cheese


Seese is not good to give putter; your belly is al putter.


Seese, and Putter? Have I lived to stand at the taunt of one that makes
Fritters of English? This is enough to be the decay of lust and late-walking
through the Realm


Why Sir John, do you think though we would have thrust virtue out of our
hearts by the head and shoulders, and have given our selves without scruple to
hell, that ever the devil could have made you our delight


What, a hodge-pudding? A bag of flax?


A puffed man?


Old, cold, withered, and of intolerable entrails?


And one that is as slanderous as Satan?


And as poor as Job?


And as wicked as his wife?


And given to Fornications, and to Tauernes, and Sack, and Wine, and
Metheglins, and to drinkings and swearings, and starings? Pribles and prables


Well, I am your Theme: you have the start of me. I am dejected: I am not able
to answer the Welsh Flannell, Ignorance it self is a plummet ore me, use me as
you will


Marry Sir, we will bring you to Windsor to one Mr Broom, that you have cozon'd
of money, to whom you should have bin a Pander: over and above that you have
suffered, I think, to repay that money will be a biting affliction


Yet be cheerful Knight* thou shall eat a posset to night at my house, where I
will desire thee to laugh at my wife, that now laughes at thee: Tell her Mr
Slender has married her daughter


Doctors doubt that;

If Anne Page be my daughter, she is (by this) Doctor Caius wife.


Whoa hoe, hoe, Father Page.


Son? How now? How now Son,
Have you dispatched?

Dispatched? I Will make the best in Gloftershire know on it: would I were hanged
la, else


Of what son?


I came yonder at Eaton to marry Mistress Anne Page, and she is a great lubberly
boy. If it had not been in th Church, I would have swing'd him, or he should
have swing'd me. If I did not think it had been Anne Page, would I might
never stir, and it is a Post-masters Boy


Upon my life then, you took the wrong.


What need you tell me that? I think so, when I took a Boy for a Girl: If I
had been married to him, (for all he was in woman's apparel) I would not have
had him


Why this is your own folly,
Did not I tell you how you should know my daughter,
By her garments?

I went to her in green, and cried Mum, and she cride budget, as Anne and I
had appointed, and yet it was not Anne, but a Post-masters boy


Good George be not angry, I knew of your purpose: turned my daughter into
white, and indeed she is now with the Doctor at the Deanrie, and there married


Ver is Mistress Page: by gar I am cozoned, I ha married oon Garsoon, a boy; oon
pesant, by gar. A boy, it is not An Page, by gar, I am cozened


Why? did you take her in white?


I be gar, and it is a boy: be gar, I Will raise all Windsor.


This is strange: Who has got the right Anne?


My heart misgiues me, here comes Mr Fenton.
How now Mr Fenton?

Pardon good father, good my mother pardon


Now Mistress:
How chance you went not with Mr Slender?

Why went you not with Mr Doctor, maid?


You do amaze her: hear the truth of it,
You would have married her most shamefully,
Where there was no proportion held in love:
The truth is, she and I (long since contracted)
Are now so sure that nothing can dissolve us:
The offense is holy, that she has committed,
And this deceit looses the name of craft,
Of disobedience, or vnduteous title,
Since therein she does euitate and shun
A thousand irreligious cursed hours
Which forced marriage would have brought upon her.

Stand not amazed, here is no remedy:
In Love, the heavens themselves do guide the state,
Money buys Lands, and wives are sold by fate.

I am glad, though you have taken a special stand to strike at me, that your
Arrow has glanced


Well, what remedy? Fenton, heaven give thee joy, what cannot be eschew'd, must
be embraced


When night-dogges run, all sorts of Dear are chased.


Well, I will muse no further: Mr Fenton,
Heaven give you many, many merry days:
Good husband, let us every one go home,
And laugh this sport ore by a Country fire,
Sir John and all.

Let it be so (Sir John:)
To Master Broom, you yet shall hold your word,
For he, to night, shall lie with Mistress Ford*


