I Learn in this Letter, that Don Peter of Arragon, comes this night to
Messina


He is very near by this: he was not three Leagues off when I left him.


How many Gentlemen have you lost in this action?


But few of any sort, and none of name.


A victory is twice it self, when the atchieuer brings home full numbers: I
find here, that Don Peter has bestowed much honor on a young Florentine,
called Claudio


Much deserved on his part, and equally remembered by Don Pedro, he has borne
himself beyond the promise of his age, doing in the figure of a Lamb, the
feats of a Lion, he has indeed better bettred expectation, then you must
expect of me to tell you how


He has an Uncle here in Messina, will be very much glad of it.


I have already delivered him letters, and there appears much joy in him,
even so much, that joy could not show it self modest enough, without a badg of
bitterness


Did he break out into tears?


In great measure.


A kind ouerflow of kindness, there are no faces truer, then those that are
so washed, how much better is it to weep at joy, then to joy at weeping


I pray you, is Signior Mountant^ returned from the wars, or no?


I know none of that name, Lady, there was none such in the army of any sort.


What is he that you ask for Niece?


My cousin means Signior Benedick of Padua


O he is returned, and as pleasant as ever he was.


He set up his bills here in Messina, and challenged Cupid at the Flight: and my
Uncles fool reading the Challenge, subscribed for Cupid, and challenged him
at the Burbolt. I pray you, how many has he killed and eaten in these wars?
But how many has he killed? for indeed, I promised to eat all of his killing


'Faith Niece, you tax Signior Benedicke too much, but he will be meet with you,
I doubt it not


He has done good service Lady in these wars.


You had musty victual, and he has help to ease it: he is a very valiant
Trencher-man, he has an excellent stomach


And a good soldier too Lady.


And a good soldier to a Lady. But what is he to a Lord?


A Lord to a Lord, a man to a man, stuffed with all honorable virtues.


It is so indeed, he is no less then a stuffed man: but for the stuffing well,
we are all mortal


You must not (sir) mistake my Niece, there is a kind of merry war betwixt
Signior Benedick, and her: they never meet, but there is a skirmish of wit
between them


Alas, he gets nothing by that. In our last conflict, four of his five wits
went halting off, and now is the whole man governed with one: so that if he
have wit enough to keep himself warm, let him bear it for a difference
between himself and his horse: For it is all the wealth that he has left, to
be known a reasonable creature. Who is his companion now? He has every month
a new sworn brother


Is It possible?


Very easily possible: he wears his faith but as the fashion of his hat, it
ever changes with ye next block


I see (Lady) the Gentleman is not in your books.


No, and he were, I would burn my study. But I pray you, who is his companion?
Is there no young squarer now, that will make a voyage with him to the devil


He is most in the company of the right noble Claudio.


O Lord, he will hang upon him like a disease: he is sooner caught then the
pestilence, and the taker runs presently mad. God help the noble Claudio, if
he have caught the Benedict, it will cost him a thousand pound ere he be cured


I will hold friends with you Lady.


Do good friend.


You Will never run mad Niece.


No, not till a hot January.


Don Pedro is approached.


Good Signior Leonato, you are come to meet your trouble: the fashion of the
world is to avoid cost, and you encounter it


Never came trouble to my house in the likeness of your Grace: for trouble being
gone, comfort should remain: but when you depart from me, sorrow abides, and
happiness takes his leave


You embrace your charge too willingly: I think this is your daughter.


Her mother has many times told me so.


Were you in doubt that you asked her?


Signior Benedicke, no, for then were you a child.


You have it full Benedicke, we may guess by this, what you are, being a man,
truly the Lady fathers her self: be happy Lady, for you are like an
honorable father


If Signior Leonato be her father, she would not have his head on her shoulders
for all Messina, as like him as she is


I wonder that you will still be talking, signior Benedicke* no body marks you.


What my dear Lady Disdain! are you yet living?


Is it possible Disdain should die, while she has such meet food to feed
it, as Signior Benedicke? Courtesy it self must convert to Disdain, if you
come in her presence


Then is courtesy a turne-coate, but it is certain I am loved of all Ladies,
only you excepted: and I would I could find in my heart that I had not a hard
heart, for truly I love none


A dear happiness to women, they would else have been troubled with a
pernicious Su^er, I thank God and my cold blood, I am of your humor for that,
I had rather hear my Dog bark at a Crow, than a man swear he loves me


God keep your Ladyship still in that mind, so some Gentleman or other shall
escape a predestinate scratcht face


Scratching could not make it worse, and 'twere such a face as yours were.


Well, you are a rare Parrat teacher.


A bird of my tongue, is better than a beast of your.


I would my horse had the speed of your tongue, and so good a continuer, but
keep your way a Gods name, I have done


You always end with a Iades trick, I know you of old.


This is the sum of all: Leonato, signior Claudio, and signior Benedicke; my
dear friend Leonato, has invited you all, I tell him we shall stay here, at
the least a month, and he heartily prays some occasion may detain us longer:
I dare swear he is no hypocrite, but prays from his heart


If you swear, my Lord, you shall not be forsworn, let me bid you welcome,
my Lord, being reconciled to the Prince your brother: I owe you all duty


I thank you, I am not of many words, but I thank you.


Please it your grace lead on?


Your hand Leonato, we will go together.


Benedicke, did thou note the daughter of signior Leonato?


I noted her not, but I looked on her.


Is she not a modest young Lady?


Do you question me as an honest man should do, for my simple true judgment?
or would you have me speak after my custom, as being a professed tyrant to
their sex


No, I pray thee speak in sober judgment.


Why in faith me thinks she is too low for a hie praise, too brown for a fair
praise, and too little for a great praise, only this commendation I can
afford her, that were she other then she is, she were unhandsome, and being
no other, but as she is, I do not like her


Thou think I am in sport, I pray thee tell me truly how thou like her.


Would you buie her, that you enquier after her?


Can the world buie such a jewel?


Yea, and a case to put it into, but speak you this with a sad brow? Or do
you play the flowting jack, to tell us Cupid is a good Hare-finder, and Vulcan
a rare Carpenter: Come, in what key shall a man take you to go in the song


In mine eye, she is the sweetest Lady that ever I looked on.


I can see yet without spectacles, and I see no such matter: there is her cousin,
and she were not possessed with a fury, exceedes her as much in beauty, as the
first of May does the last of December: but I hope you have no intent to turn
husband, have you


I would scarce trust my self, though I had sworn the contrary, if Hero
would be my wife


Is It come to this? in faith has not the world one man but he will wear his
cap with suspicion? shall I never see a batcheller of three score again? go
to in faith, and thou will needs thrust thy neck into a yoke, wear the print
of it, and sigh away sundaies: look, don Pedro is returned to seek you


What secret has held you here, that you followed not to Leonatoes?


I would your Grace would constrain me to tell.


I charge thee on thy allegiance.


You hear, Count Claudio, I can be secret as a dumb man, I would have you
think so (but on my allegiance, mark you this, on my allegiance) he is in
love, With who? now that is your Graces part: mark how short his answer is,
with Hero, Leonatoes short daughter


If this were so, so were it vttred.


Like the old tale, my Lord, it is not so, nor 'twas not so: but indeed, God
forbid it should be so


If my passion change not shortly, God forbid it should be otherwise.


Amen, if you love her, for the Lady is very well worthy.


You speak this to fetch me in, my Lord.


By my troth I speak my thought.


And in faith, my Lord, I spoke mine.


And by my two faiths and troths, my Lord, I speak mine.


That I love her, I feel.


That she is worthy, I know.


That I neither feel how she should be loved, nor know how she should be
worthy, is the opinion that fire cannot melt out of me, I will die in it at
the stake


Thou wast ever an obstinate heretic in the despite of Beauty.


And never could maintain his part, but in the force of his will.


That a woman conceived me, I thank her: that she brought me up, I likewise
give her most humble thanks: but that I will have a ^echare winded in my
forehead, or hang my bugle in an invisible baldricke, all women shall pardon
me: because I will not do them the wrong to mistrust any, I will do my self
the right to trust none: and the fine is, (for the which I may go the finer) I
will live a Batchellor


I shall see thee ere I die, look pale with love.


With anger, with sickness, or with hunger, my Lord, not with love: prove that
ever I loose more blood with love, then I will get again with drinking, pick
out mine eyes with a Ballet-makers pen, and hang me up at the door of a
brothel-house for the sign of blind Cupid


Well, if ever thou do fall from this faith, thou will prove a notable
argument


If I do, hang me in a bottle like a Cat, and shoot at me, and he that hit's
me, let him be clapped on the shoulder, and called Adam


Well, as time shall try: In time the savage Bull does bear the yoke.


The savage bull may, but if ever the sensible Benedicke bear it, pluck off
the bulls horns, and set them in my forehead, and let me be vildely painted,
and in such great Letters as they write, here is good horse to hire: let them
signify under my sign, here you may see Benedicke the married man


If this should ever happen, thou would be horn mad.


Nay, if Cupid have not spent all his Quiver in Venice, thou will quake for
this shortly


I look for an earthquake too then.


Well, you will temporize with the hours, in the mean time, good Signior
Benedicke, repair to Leonatoes, commend me to him, and tell him I will not
fail him at supper, for indeed he has made great preparation


I have almost matter enough in me for such an Embassage, and so I commit you.


To the tuition of God. From my house, if I had it.


The sixth of July. Your loving friend, Benedick.


Nay mock not, mock not; the body of your discourse is sometime guarded with
fragments, and the guardes are but slightly basted on neither, ere you flout
old ends any further, examine your conscience, and so I leave you


My Liege, your Highness now may do me good.


My love is thine to teach, teach it but how,
And thou shall see how apt it is to learn
Any hard Lesson that may do thee good.

Has Leonato any son my Lord?


No child but Hero, she is his only heir.
Do thou affect her Claudio?

O my Lord,
When you went onward on this ended action,
I looked upon her with a soldiers eye,
That liked, but had a rougher task in hand,
Than to drive liking to the name of love:
But now I am returned, and that warre-thoughts
Have left their places vacant: in their rooms,
Come thronging soft and delicate desires,
All prompting me how fair young Hero is,
Saying I liked her ere I went to wars.

Thou will be like a lover presently,
And tire the hearer with a book of words:
If thou do love fair Hero, cherish it,
And I will break with her: wast not to this end,
That thou beganst to twist so fine a story?

How sweetly do you minister to love,
That know loves grief by his complexion!
But lest my liking might too sudden seem,
I would have salu'd it with a longer treatise.

What need ye bridge much brother then the flood?
The fairest grant is the necessity:
Look what will serve, is fit: it is once, thou love,
And I will fit thee with the remedy,
I know we shall have reuelling to night,
I will assume thy part in some disguise,
And tell fair Hero I am Claudio,
And in her bosom I Will unclasp my heart,
And take her hearing prisoner with the force
And strong encounter of my amorous tale:
Then after, to her father will I break,
And the conclusion is, she shall be thine,
In practice let us put it presently.

How now brother, where is my cosen your son: has he provided this music?


He is very busy about it, but brother, I can tell you news that you yet
dreamt not of


Are they good?


As the events stamps them, but they have ^ good cover: they* show well
outward, the Prince and Count Claudio walking in a thick pleached alley in my
orchard, were thus ouer-heard by a man of mine: the Prince discovered to
Claudio that he loved my niece your daughter, and meant to acknowledge it this
night in a dance, and if he found her accordant, he meant to take the present
time by the top, and instantly break with you of it


Has the fellow any wit that told you this?


A good sharp fellow, I will send for him, and question him your self.


No, no; we will hold it as a dream, till it appear it self: but I will
acquaint my daughter withal, that she may be the better prepared for an
answer, if peradventure this be true: go you and tell her of it: coosins, you
know what you have to do, O I cry you mercy friend, go you with me and I
will use your skill, good cousin have a care this busy time


What the good year my Lord, why are you thus out of measure sad?


There is no measure in the occasion that breeds, therefore the sadness is
without limit


You should hear reason.


And when I have heard it, what blessing brings it?


If not a present remedy, yet a patient sufferance.


I wonder that thou (being as thou say thou art, borne under Saturn) go
about to apply a moral medicine, to a mortifying mischief: I cannot hide what
I am: I must be sad when I have cause, and smile at no man's jests, eat when I
have stomach, and wait for no man's leisure: sleep when I am drowsy, and tend
on no man's business, laugh when I am merry, and claw no man in his humor


Yea, but you must not make the full show of this, till you may do it without
controllment, you have of late stood out against your brother, and he has
taken you newly into his grace, where it is impossible you should take root, but
by the fair weather that you make your self, it is needful that you frame the
season for your own harvest


I had rather be a canker in a hedge, then a rose in his grace, and it better
fits my blood to be disdained of all, then to fashion a carriage to rob love
from any: in this (though I cannot be said to be a flattering honest man) it
must not be denied but I am a plain dealing villain, I am trusted with a
mussell, and enfranchisde with a clog, therefore I have decreed, not to sing in
my cage: if I had my mouth, I would bite: if I had my liberty, I would do my
liking: in the mean time, let me be that I am, and seek not to alter me


Can you make no use of your discontent?


I will make all use of it, for I use it only.
Who comes here? what news Borachio?

I came yonder from a great supper, the Prince your brother is royally
entertained by Leonato, and I can give you intelligence of an intended marriage


Will it serve for any Model to build mischief on? What is he for a fool
that betrothes himself to unquietness


Mary it is your brothers right hand.


Who, the most exquisite Claudio?


Even he.


A proper squier, and who, and who, which way looks he?


Mary on Hero, the daughter and Heir of Leonato.


A very forward March-chicke, how came you to this?


Being entertained for a perfumer, as I was smoking a musty room, comes me
the Prince and Claudio, hand in hand in sad conference: I whipped behind the
Arras, and there heard it agreed upon, that the Prince should woo Hero for
himself, and having obtained her, give her to Count Claudio


Come, come, let us thither, this may prove food to my displeasure, that young
start-vp has all the glory of my overthrow: if I can cross him any way, I
bless my self every way, you are both sure, and will assist me


To the death my Lord.


Let us to the great supper, their cheer is the greater that I am subdued,
would the Cook were of my mind: shall we go prove what is to be done


We Will wait upon your Lordship.


Was not Count John here at supper?


I saw him not.


How tartly that Gentleman looks, I never can see him, but I am heart-burn'd
an hour after


He is of a very melancholy disposition.


He were an excellent man that were made just in the midway between him and
Benedicke, the one is too like an image and says nothing, and the other too
like my Ladies eldest son, evermore tatling


Then half signior Benedicks tongue in Count John's mouth, and half Count
John's melancholy in Signior Benedicks face


With a good leg, and a good foot uncle, and money enough in his purse, such
a man would win any woman in the world, if he could get her good will


By my troth Niece, thou will never get thee a husband, if thou be so shrewd of
thy tongue


Infaith she is too cursed.


Too cursed is more then cursed, I shall lessen Gods sending that way: for it is
said, God sends a cursed Cow short horns, but to a Cow too cursed he sends none


So, by being too cursed, God will send you no horns.


Just, if he send me no husband, for the which blessing, I am at him upon my
knees every morning and evening: Lord, I could not endure a husband with a
beard on his face, I had rather lie in the woollen


You may light upon a husband that has no beard.


What should I do with him? dress him in my apparel, and make him my waiting
gentlewoman? he that has a beard, is more then a youth: and he that has no
beard, is less then a man: and he that is more then a youth, is not for me:
and he that is less then a man, I am not for him: therefore I will even take
sixepence in earnest of the Berrord, and lead his Apes into hell


Well then, go you into hell.


No, but to the gate, and there will the Devil meet me like an old Cuckold
with horns on his head, and say, get you to heaven Beatrice, get you to
heaven, here is no place for you maids, so deliver I up my Apes, and away to S.
Peter: for the heavens, he shows me where the Batchellers sit, and there
live we as merry as the day is long


Well niece, I trust you will be ruled by your father.


Yes faith, it is my cosens duty to make curtsie, and say, as it please you:
but yet for all that cousin, let him be a handsome fellow, or else make an other
cursie, and say, father, as it please me


Well niece, I hope to see you one day sitted with a husband.


Not till God make men of some other metal then earth, would it not grieve a
woman to be ouer-mastred with a piece of valiant dust? to make account of her
life to a clod of waiward marle? no uncle, i will none: Adams sons are my
brethren, and truly I hold it a sin to match in my kindred


Daughter, remember what I told you, if the Prince do solicit you in that
kind, you know your answer


The fault will be in the music cousin, if you be not woed in good time: if
the Prince be too important, tell him there is measure in every thing, and so
dance out the answer, for hear me Hero, wooing, wedding, and repenting, is as
a Scotch ijgge, a measure, and a cinque-pace: the first suite is hot and hasty
like a Scotch ijgge (and full as fantastical) the wedding manerly modest, (as
a measure) full of state and aunchentry, and then comes repentance, and with
his bad legs falls into the cinque-pace faster and faster, till he sinkes into
his grave


Cousin you apprehend passing shrewdly.


I have a good eye uncle, I can see a Church by daylight.


The reuellers are entering brother, make good room.


Lady, will you walk about with your friend?


So you walk softly, and look sweetly, and say nothing, I am yours for the
walk, and especially when I walk away


With me in your company.


I may say so when I please.


And when please you to say so?


When I like your favor, for God defend the Lute should be like the case.


My visor is Philemons roof, within the house is Love.


Why then your visor should be thatcht.


Speak low if you speak Love.


Well, I would you did like me.


So would not I for your own sake, for I have many ill qualities.


Which is one?


I say my prayers alowd.


I love you the better, the hearers may cry Amen.


God match me with a good dauncer.


Amen.


And God keep him out of my sight when the dance is done: answer Clarke.


No more words the Clarke is answered.


I know you well enough, you are Signior Anthonio.


At a word, I am not.


I know you by the wagling of your head.


To tell you true, I counterfeit him.


You could never do him so ill well, unless you were the very man: here is his
dry hand up and down, you are he, you are he


At a word I am not.


Come, come, do you think I do not know you by your excellent wit? can
virtue hide it self? go to, mumme, you are he, graces will appear, and
there is an end


Will you not tell me who told you so?


No, you shall pardon me.


Nor will you not tell me who you are?


Not now.


That I was disdainful, and that I had my good wit out of the hundred merry
tales: well, this was Signior Benedicke that said so


What Is he?


I am sure you know him well enough.


Not I, believe me.


Did he never make you laugh?


I pray you what is he?


Why he is the Princes ieaster, a very dull fool, only his gift is, in
devising impossible slanders, none but Libertines delight in him, and the
commendation is not in his wit, but in his villainy, for he both pleases
men and angers them, and then they laugh at him, and beat him: I am sure he is
in the Fleet, I would he had boorded me


When I know the Gentleman, I Will tell him what you say.


Do, do, he will but break a comparison or two on me, which peradventure (not
marked, or not laughed at) strikes him into melancholy, and then there is a
Partridge wing saved, for the fool will eat no supper that night. We must
follow the Leaders


In every good thing.


Nay, if they lead to any ill, I will leave them at the next turning.


Sure my brother is amorous on Hero, and has withdrawn her father to break
with him about it: the Ladies follow her, and but one visor remains


And that is Claudio, I know him by his bearing.


Are not you signior Benedicke?


You know me well, I am he.


Signior, you are very near my Brother in his love, he is enamored on Hero, I
pray you dissuade him from her, she is no equal for his birth: you may do the
part of an honest man in it


How know you he loves her?


I heard him swear his affection,


So did I too, and he swore he would marry her to night.


Come, let us to the banquet.


Thus answer I in name of Benedicke,
But hear these ill news with the ears of Claudio:
It Is certain so, the Prince woes for himself:
Friendship is constant in all other things,
Save in the Office and affairs of love:
Therefore all hearts in love use their own tongues.
Let every eye negotiate for it self,
And trust no Agent: for beauty is a witch,
Against whose charms, faith melts into blood:
This is an accident of hourly proof,
Which I mistrusted not. Farewell therefore Hero.

Count Claudio.


Yea, the same.


Come, will you go with me?


Whither?


Even to the next Willow, about your own business, Count. What fashion will
you wear the Garland off? About your neck, like an Usurers chain? Or under
your arm, like a Lieutenants scarf? You must wear it one way, for the Prince
has got your Hero


I wish him joy of her.


Why that is spoken like an honest Drouier, so they sell Bullockes: but did you
think the Prince would have served you thus


I pray you leave me.


Ho now you strike like the blindman, 'twas the boy that stole your meat, and
you will beat the post


If it will not be, I Will leave you.


Alas poor hurt foul, now will he creep into sedges: But that my Lady
Beatrice should know me, and not know me: the Princes fool! Hah? It may be I
go under that title, because I am merry: yea but so I am apt to do my self
wrong: I am not so reputed, it is the base (though bitter) disposition of
Beatrice, that putt's the world into her person, and so gives me out: well, I Will
be revenged as I may


Now Signior, where is the Count, did you see him?


Troth my Lord, I have played the part of Lady Fame, I found him here as
melancholy as a Lodge in a Warren, I told him, and I think, told him true,
that your grace had got the will of this young Lady, and I offered him my
company to a willow tree, either to make him a garland, as being forsaken, or
to bind him a rod, as being worthy to be whipped


To be whipped, what is his fault?


The slat transgression of a Schoole-boy, who being ouer-ioyed with finding a
birds nest, shows it his companion, and he steals it


Will thou make a trust, a transgression? the transgression is in the stealer.


Yet it had not been amiss the rod had been made, and the garland too, for
the garland he might have worn himself, and the rod he might have bestowed
on you, who (as I take it) have stolen his birds nest


I will but teach them to sing, and restore them to the owner.


If their singing answer your saying* by my faith you say honestly.


The Lady Beatrice has a quarrel to you, the Gentleman that daunst with her,
told her she is much wronged by you


O she misusde me past the indurance of a block: an oak but with one green
leaf on it, would have answered her: my very visor began to assume life, and
scold with her: she told me, not thinking I had been my self, that I was
the Princes Iester, and that I was duller then a great thaw, hu^ling jest upon
jest, with such impossible conueiance upon me, that I stood like a man at a
mark, with a whole army shooting at me: she speaks poynyards, and every word
stabbes: if her breath were as terrible as terminations, there were no living
near her, she would infect to the north star: I would not marry her, though
she were endowed with all that Adam had left him before he transgrest, she
would have made Hercules have turned spit, yea, and have cleft his club to make
the fire too: come, talk not of her, you shall find her the infernal Ate in
good apparel. I would to God some scholar would conjure her, for certainly
while she is here, a man may live as quiet in hell, as in a sanctuary, and
people sin upon purpose, because they would go thither, so indeed all
disquiet, horror, and perturbation follows her


Look here she comes.


Will your Grace command me any service to the worlds end? I will go on the
slightest arrand now to the Antypodes that you can devise to send me on: I will
fetch you a tooth-picker now from the furthest inch of Asia: bring you the
length of Prester John's foot: fetch you a hair off the great Chams beard: do
you any embassage to the Pigmies, rather then hold three words conference,
with this Harpy: you have no employment for me


None, but to desire your good company.


O God sir, heeres a dish I love not, I cannot endure this Lady tongue.


Come Lady, come, you have lost the heart of Signior Benedicke.


Indeed my Lord, he lent it me a while, and I gave him use for it, a double
heart for a single one, marry once before he won it of me, with false dice,
therefore your Grace may well say I have lost it


You have put him down Lady, you have put him down.


So I would not he should do me, my Lord, lest I should prove the mother of
fools: I have brought Count Claudio, whom you sent me to seek


Why how now Count, wherefore are you sad?


Not sad my Lord.


How then? sick?


Neither, my Lord.


The Count is neither sad, nor sick, nor merry, nor well: but civil Count,
civil as an Orange, and something of a jealous complexion


In Faith Lady, I think your blazon to be true, though I Will be sworn, if he be
so, his conceit is false: here Claudio, I have wooed in thy name, and fair
Hero is won, I have broke with her father, and his good will obtained, name the
day of marriage, and God give thee joy


Count, take of me my daughter, and with her my fortunes: his grace has made
the match, and all grace say, Amen to it


Speak Count, it is your Qu.


Silence is the perfectest Herault of joy, I were but little happy if I could
say, how much? Lady, as you are mine, I am yours, I give away my self for you,
and dote upon the exchange


Speak cousin, or (if you cannot) stop his mouth with a kiss, and let not him
speak neither


Infaith Lady you have a merry heart.


Yea my Lord I thank it, poor fool it keeps on the windy side of Care, my
coosin tells him in his ear that he is in my heart


And so she does coosin.


Good Lord for alliance: thus goes every one to the world but I, and I am
sun-burn'd, I may sit in a corner and cry, heigh ho for a husband


Lady Beatrice, I will get you one.


I would rather have one of your fathers getting: has your Grace never a
brother like you? your father got excellent husbands, if a maid could come by
them


Will you have me? Lady.


No, my Lord, unless I might have another for working-daies, your Grace is too
costly to wear every day: but I beseech your Grace pardon me, I was borne to
speak all mirth, and no matter


Your silence most offends me, and to be merry, best becomes you, for out of
question, you were born in a merry hour


No sure my Lord, my Mother cried, but then there was a star daunst, and
under that was I borne: cosins God give you joy


Niece, will you look to those rhings I told you of?


I cry you mercy Uncle, by your Graces pardon.


By my troth a pleasant spirited Lady.


There Is little of the melancholy element in her my Lord, she is never sad, but
when she sleeps, and not ever sad then: for I have heard my daughter say, she
has often dreamt of unhappiness, and wakt her self with laughing


She cannot endure to hear tell of a husband.


O, by no means, she mocks all her wooers out of suite.


She were an excellent wife for Benedick.


O Lord, my Lord, if they were but a week married, they would talk themselves
mad


Count Claudio, when mean you to go to Church?


To morrow my Lord, Time goes on crutches, till Love have all his rites.


Not till monday, my dear son, which is hence a just seven night, and a time
too brief too, to have all things answer mind


Come, you shake the head at so long a breathing, but I warrant thee Claudio,
the time shall not go dully by us, I will in the interim, undertake one of
Hercules labors, which is, to bring Signior Benedicke and the Lady Beatrice
into a mountain of affection, the one with the other, I would feign have it a
match, and I doubt not but to fashion it, if you three will but minister such
assistance as I shall give you direction


My Lord, I am for you, though it cost me ten nights watchings.


And I my Lord.


And you to gentle Hero?


I will do any modest office, my Lord, to help my cousin to a good husband.


And Benedick is not the vnhopefullest husband that I know: thus far can I
praise him, he is of a noble strain, of approved valor, and confirmed
honesty, I will teach you how to humor your cousin, that she shall fall in
love with Benedicke, and I, with your two helps, will so practice on
Benedicke, that in despite of his quick wit, and his queasie stomach, he
shall fall in love with Beatrice: if we can do this, Cupid is no longer an
Archer, his glory shall be ours, for we are the only loue-gods, go in with
me, and I will tell you my drift


It is so, the Count Claudio shall marry the daughter of Leonato.


Yea my Lord, but I can cross it.


Any bar, any cross, any impediment, will be medicinable to me, I am sick
in displeasure to him, and whatsoever comes athwart his affection, ranges
euenly with mine, how can thou cross this marriage


Not honestly my Lord, but so covertly, that no dishonesty shall appear in me.


Show me breefely how.


I think I told your Lordship a year since, how much I am in the favor of
Margaret, the waiting gentlewoman to Hero


I remember.


I can at any unseasonable instant of the night, appoint her to look out at her
Ladies chamber window


What life is in that, to be the death of this marriage?


The poison of that lies in you to temper, go you to the Prince your brother,
spare not to tell him, that he has wronged his Honor in marrying the renowned
Claudio, whose estimation do you mightily hold up, to a contaminated stale,
such a one as Hero


What proof shall I make of that?


Proof enough, to misuse the Prince, to vex Claudio, to undo Hero, and kill
Leonato, look you for any other issue


Only to despite them, I will endeavor any thing.


Go then, find me a meet hour, to draw on Pedro and the Count Claudio
alone, tell them that you know that Hero loves me, intend a kind of zeal both
to the Prince and Claudio (as in a love of your brothers honor who has made
this match) and his friends reputation, who is thus like to be cosen'd with the
semblance of a maid, that you have discovered thus: they will scarcely believe
this without trial: offer them instances which shall bear no less
likelihood, than to see me at her chamber window, hear me call Margaret,
Hero; hear Margaret term me Claudio, and bring them to see this the very
night before the intended wedding, for in the mean time, I will so fashion the
matter, that Hero shall be absent, and there shall appear such seeming truths
of Heroes disloyalty, that jealousy shall be called assurance, and all the
preparation overthrown


Grow this to what adverse issue it can, I will put it in practice: be cunning
in the working this, and thy fee is a thousand ducates


Be thou constant in the accusation, and my cunning shall not shame me.


I will presently go learn their day of marriage.


Boy.


Signior.


In my chamber window lies a book, bring it hither to me in the orchard.


I am here already sir.


I know that, but I would have thee hence, and here again. I do much wonder,
that one man seeing how much another man is a fool, when he dedicates his
behauiours to love, will after he has laughed at such shallow follies in
others, become the argument of his own scorn, by falling in love, and such a
man is Claudio, I have known when there was no music with him but the drum
and the fife, and now had he rather hear the taber and the pipe: I have
known when he would have walked ten mile afoot, to see a good armor, and now
will he lie ten nights awake caruing the fashion of a new dublet: he was wont
to speak plain, and to the purpose (like an honest man and a soldier) and
now is he turned orthography, his words are a very fantastical banquet, just
so many strange dishes: may I be so converted, and see with these eyes? I
cannot tell, I think not: I will not be sworn, but love may transform me to
an oyster, but I Will take my oath on it, till he have made an oyster of me, he
shall never make me such a fool: one woman is fair, yet I am well: another is
wise, yet I am well: another virtuous, yet I am well: but till all graces be in
one woman* one woman shall not come in my grace: rich she shall be, that is
certain: wise, or I Will none: virtuous, or I Will never cheapen her: fair, or I Will
never look on her: mild, or come not near me: Noble, or not for an Angel:
of good discourse: an excellent Musician, and her hair shall be of what color
it please God, hah! the Prince and Monsieur Love, I will hide me in the Arbor


Come, shall we hear this music?


Yea my good Lord: how still the evening is,
As hushed on purpose to grace harmony.

See you where Benedicke has hid himself?


O very well my Lord: the music ended,
We Will fit the kid-foxe with a penny worth.

Come Balthazar, we will hear that song again.


O good my Lord, tax not so bad a voice,
To slander music any more then once.

It is the witness still of excellency,
To slander Music any more then once.

It is the witness still of excellency,
To put a strange face on his own perfection,
I pray thee sing, and let me woe no more.

Because you talk of wooing, I will sing,
Since many a wooer does commence his suit,
To her he thinks not worthy, yet he wooes,
Yet will he swear he loves.

Nay pray thee come,
Or if thou will hold longer argument,
Do it in notes.

Note this before my notes,
There Is not a note of mine that is worth the noting.

Why these are very crotchets that he speaks,
Note notes forsooth, and nothing.

Now divine air, now is his soul ravished, is it not strange that sheep guts
should hale souls out of men's bodies? well, a horn for my money when all is
done


Sigh no more Ladies, sigh no more,
Men were deceivers ever,
One foot in Sea and one on shore,
To one thing constant never,
Then sigh not so, but let them go,
And be you blithe and bonnis,
Converting all your sounds of woe,
Into hey nony nony.
Sing no more ditties, sing no more,
Of dumps so dull and heavy,
The fraud of men were ever so,
Since summer first was leauy,
Then sigh not so, etc.

By my troth a good song.


And an ill singer, my Lord.


Ha, no, no faith, thou singst well enough for a shift.


And he had been a dog that should have howld thus, they would have hanged him,
and I pray God his bad voice bode no mischief, I had as liefe have heard the
night-rauen, come what plague could have come after it


Yea marry, do thou hear Balthazar? I pray thee get us some excellent
music: for to morrow night we would have it at the Lady Heroes chamber window


The best I can, my Lord.


Do so, farewell. Come hither Leonato, what was it you told me of to day, that
your Niece Beatrice was in love with signior Benedicke


O I, stalk on, stalk on, the foul sits. I did never think that Lady would
have loved any man


No nor I neither, but most wonderful, that she should so dote on Signior
Benedicke, whom she has in all outward behauiours seemed ever to abhor


Is It possible? sits the wind in that corner?


By my troth my Lord, I cannot tell what to think of it, but that she loves
him with an enraged affection, it is past the infinite of thought


May be she does but counterfeit.


Faith like enough.


O God! counterfeit? there was never counterfeit of passion, came so near the
life of passion as she discouers it


Why what effects of passion shows she?


Bait the hook well, this fish will bite.


What effects my Lord? she will sit you, you heard my daughter tell you how.


She did indeed.


How, how I pray you? you amaze me, I would have thought her spirit had been
invincible against all assaults of affection


I would have sworn it had, my Lord, especially against Benedicke.


I should think this a gull, but that the white-bearded fellow speaks it:
knavery cannot sure hide himself in such reverence


He has taken the infection, hold it up.


Has she made her affection known to Benedicke?


No, and swears she never will, that is her torment.


It Is true indeed, so your daughter says: shall I, says she, that have so often
encountered him with scorn, write to him that I love him


This says she now when she is beginning to write to him, for she will be up
twenty times a night, and there will she sit in her smock, till she have writ
a sheet of paper: my daughter tells us all


Now you talk of a sheet of paper, I remember a pretty jest your daughter told
us of


O when she had writ it, and was reading it over, she found Benedicke and
Beatrice between the sheet


That.


O she tore the letter into a thousand halfpence, raild at her self, that she
should be so immodest to write, to one that she knew would flout her: I
measure him, says she, by my own spirit, for I should flout him if he writ
to me, yea though I love him, I should


Then down upon her knees she falls, weeps, sobs, beats her heart, tears
her hair, prays, curses, O sweet Benedicke, God give me patience


She does indeed, my daughter says so, and the ecstasy has so much ouerborne
her, that my daughter is sometime afeard she will do a desperate outrage to
her self, it is very true


It were good that Benedicke knew of it by some other, if she will not discover
it


To what end? he would but make a sport of it, and torment the poor Lady worse.


And he should, it were an alms to hang him, she is an excellent sweet Lady,
and (out of all suspicion,) she is virtuous


And she is exceeding wise.


In every thing, but in loving Benedicke.


O my Lord, wisdom and blood combating in so tender a body, we have ten
proofs to one, that blood has the victory, I am sorry for her, as I have just
cause, being her Uncle, and her Guardian


I would she had bestowed this dotage on me, I would have daft all other
respects, and made her half my self: I pray you tell Benedicke of it, and
hear what he will say


Were it good think you?


Hero thinks surely she will die, for she says she will die, if he love her
not, and she will die ere she make her love known, and she will die if he
woo her, rather than she will bate one breath of her accustomed crossenesse


She does well, if she should make tender of her love, it is very possible he will
scorn it, for the man (as you know all) has a contemptible spirit


He is a very proper man.


He has indeed a good outward happiness.


Before God, and in my mind very wise.


He does indeed show some sparks that are like wit.


And I take him to be valiant.


As Hector, I assure you, and in the managing of quarrels you may see he is
wise, for either he auoydes them with great discretion, or undertakes them
with a Christian-like fear


If he do fear God, a must necessarily keep peace, if he break the
peace, he ought to enter into a quarrel with fear and trembling


And so will he do, for the man does fear God, howsoever it seems not in him,
by some large ieasts he will make: well, I am sorry for your niece, shall we
go see Benedicke, and tell him of her love


Never tell him, my Lord, let her wear it out with good counsel.


Nay that is impossible, she may wear her heart out first.


Well, we will hear further of it by your daughter, let it cool the while, I
love Benedicke well, and I could wish he would modestly examine himself, to
see how much he is unworthy to have so good a Lady


My Lord, will you walk? dinner is ready.


If he do not dote on her upon this, I will never trust my expectation.


Let there be the same Net spread for her, and that must your daughter and her
gentlewoman carry: the sport will be, when they hold one an opinion of another
dotage, and no such matter, that is the Scene that I would see, which will be
merely a dumb show: let us send her to call him into dinner


This can be no trick, the conference was sadly borne, they have the truth of
this from Hero, they seem to pity the Lady: it seems her affections have
the full bent: love me? why it must be requited: I hear how I am censured,
they say I will bear my self proudly, if I perceive the love come from her:
they say too, that she will rather die than give any sign of affection: I did
never think to marry, I must not seem proud, happy are they that hear their
detractions, and can put them to mending: they say the Lady is fair, it is a
truth, I can bear them witness: and virtuous, it is so, I cannot reprove it,
and wise, but for loving me, by my troth it is no addition to her wit, nor no
great argument of her folly; for I will be horribly in love with her, I may
chance have some odd quirkes and remnants of wit broken on me, because I
have railed so long against marriage: but does not the appetite alter? a man
loves the meat in his youth, that he cannot endure in his age. Shall quips and
sentences, and these paper bullets of the brain awe a man from the careere of
his humor? No, the world must be peopled. When I said I would die a batcheler,
I did not think I should live till I were married, here comes Beatrice: by this
day, she is a fair Lady, I do spy some marks of love in her


Against my will I am sent to bid you come in to dinner.


Fair Beatrice, I thank you for your pains.


I took no more pains for those thanks, then you take pains to thank me,
if it had been painful, I would not have come


You take pleasure then in the message.


Yea just so much as you may take upon a knives point, and choke a daw
withal: you have no stomach signior, fare you well


Ha, against my will I am sent to bid you come into dinner: there is a double
meaning in that: I took no more pains for those thanks then you took pains
to thank me, that is as much as to say, any pains that I take for you is as
easy as thanks: if I do not take pity of her I am a villain, if I do not
love her I am a Jew, I will go get her picture


Good Margaret run thee to the parlour,
There shall thou find my Cousin Beatrice,
Proposing with the Prince and Claudio,
Whisper her ear, and tell her I and Vrsula,
Walk in the Orchard, and our whole discourse
Is all of her, say that thou ouer-heardst us,
And bid her steal into the pleached bower,
Where hony-suckles ripened by the sun,
Forbid the sun to enter: like favorites,
Made proud by Princes, that advance their pride,
Against that power that bred it, there will she hide her,
To listen our purpose, this is thy office,
Bear thee well in it, and leave us alone.

I Will make her come I warrant you presently.


Now Vrsula, when Beatrice does come,
As we do trace this alley up and down,
Our talk must only be of Benedicke,
When I do name him, let it be thy part,
To praise him more then ever man did merit,
My talk to thee must be how Benedicke
Is sick in love with Beatrice: of this matter,
Is little Cupids crasty arrow made,
That only wounds by hearsay: now begin,
For look where Beatrice like a Lapwing runs
Close by the ground, to hear our conference.

The pleasant'st angling is to see the fish
Cut with her golden ores the silver stream,
And greedily devour the treacherous bait:
So angle we for Beatrice, who even now,
Is couched in the wood-bine couerture,
Fear you not my part of the Dialogue.

Then go we near her that her ear loose nothing,
Of the false sweet bait that we lay for it:
No truly Vrsula, she is too disdainful,
I know her spirits are as coy and wild,
As Haggerds of the rock.

But are you sure,
That Benedicke loves Beatrice so entirely?

So says the Prince, and my new trothed Lord.


And did they bid you tell her of it, Madam?


They did entreat me to acquaint her of it,
But I persuaded them, if they loved Benedicke,
To wish him wrestle with affection,
And never to let Beatrice know of it.

Why did you so, does not the Gentleman
Deserve as full as fortunate a bed,
As ever Beatrice shall couch upon?

O God of love! I know he does deserve,
As much as may be yielded to a man:
But Nature never framed a woman's heart,
Of prowder stuff then that of Beatrice:
Disdain and Scorn ride sparkling in her eyes,
Mis-prizing what they look on, and her wit
Values it self so highly, that to her
All matter else seems weak: she cannot love,
Nor take no shape nor project of affection,
She is so self indeared.

Sure I think so,
And therefore certainly it were not good
She knew his love, left she make sport at it.

Why you speak truth, I never yet saw man,
How wise, how noble, young, how rarely featured.
But she would spell him backward: if fair faced,
She would swear the gentleman should be her sister:
If black, why Nature drawing of an anticke,
Made a foul blot: if tall, a lance ill headed:
If low, an agot very vildlie cut:
If speaking, why a vane blown with all winds:
If silent, why a block moved with none.
So turns she every man the wrong side out,
And never gives to Truth and Virtue, that
Which simpleness and merit purchases.

Sure, sure, such carping is not commendable.


No, not to be so odd, and from all fashions,
As Beatrice is, cannot be commendable,
But who dare tell her so? if I should speak,
She would mock me into air, O she would laugh me
Out of my self, press me to death with wit,
Therefore let Benedicke like covered fire,
Consume away in sighs, waste inwardly:
It were a better death, to die with mockes,
Which is as bad as die with tickling.

Yet tell her of it, hear what she will say.


No, rather I will go to Benedicke,
And counsel him to fight against his passion,
And truly I Will devise some honest slanders,
To stain my cousin with, one does not know,
How much an ill word may impoison liking.

O do not do your cousin such a wrong,
She cannot be so much without true judgment,
Having so swift and excellent a wit
As she is prisde to have, as to refuse
So rare a Gentleman as signior Benedicke.

He is the only man of Italy,
Always excepted, my dear Claudio.

I pray you be not angry with me, Madame,
Speaking my fancy: Signior Benedicke,
For shape, for bearing argument and valor,
Goes foremost in report through Italy.

Indeed he has an excellent good name.


His excellence did earne it ere he had it:
When are you married Madame?

Why every day to morrow, come go in,
I Will show thee some attires, and have thy counsel,
Which is the best to furnish me to morrow.

She Is taken I warrant you,
We have caught her Madame?

If it prove so, then loving goes by haps,
Some Cupid kills with arrows, some with traps.

What fire is in mine ears? can this be true?
Stand I condemned for pride and scorn so much?
Contempt, farewell, and maiden pride, adieu,
No glory lives behind the back of such.
And Benedicke, love on, I will requite thee,
Taming my wild heart to thy loving hand:
If thou do love, my kindness shall incite thee
To bind our loves up in a holy band.
For others say thou do deserve, and I
Believe it better then reportingly.

I do but stay till your marriage be consummate, and then go I toward Arragon.


I Will bring you thither my Lord, if you will vouchsafe me.


Nay, that would be as great a soil in the new gloss of your marriage, as to
show a child his new coat and forbid him to wear it, I will only be bold
with Benedicke for his company, for from the crown of his head, to the sole
of his foot, he is all mirth, he has twice or thrice cut Cupids bow-string,
and the little hangman dare not shoot at him, he has a heart as sound as a
bell, and his tongue is the clapper, for what his heart thinks, his tongue
speaks


Gallants, I am not as I have bin.


So say I, methinkes you are sadder.


I hope he be in love.


Hang him truant, there is no true drop of blood in him to be truly touched with
love, if he be sad, he wants money


I have the toothache.


Draw it.


Hang it.


You must hang it first, and draw it afterward.


What? sigh for the toothache.


Where is but a humor or a worm.


Well, every one cannot master a grief, but he that has it.


Yet say I, he is in love.


There is no appearance of fancy in him, unless it be a fancy that he has to
strange disguises, as to be a Dutchman to day, a Frenchman to morrow: unless
he have a fancy to this foolery, as it appears he has, he is no fool for
fancy, as you would have it to appear he is


If he be not in love with some woman, there is no believing old signs, a
brushes his hat a mornings, What should that bode


Has any man seen him at the Barbers?


No, but the Barbers man has been seen with him, and the old ornament of his
cheek has already stuffed tennis balls


Indeed he looks younger than he did, by the loss of a beard.


Nay a rubs himself with Ciuit, can you smell him out by that?


That Is as much as to say, the sweet youth's in love.


The greatest note of it is his melancholy.


And when was he wont to vvash his face?


Yea, or to paint himself? for the which I hear what they say of him.


Nay, but his jesting spirit, which is now crept into a lute-string, and now
governed by stops


Indeed that tells a heavy tale for him: conclude, he is in love.


Nay, but I know who loves him.


That would I know too, I warrant one that knows him not.


Yes, and his ill conditions, and in despite of all, dies for him.


She shall be buried with her face upwards.


Yet is this no charm for the tooth-ake, old signior, walk aside with me, I
have studied eight or nine wise words to speak to you, which these
hobby-horses must not hear


For my life to break with him about Beatrice.


It Is even so, Hero and Margaret have by this played their parts with Beatrice,
and then the two Bears will not bite one another when they meet


My Lord and brother, God save you.


Good den brother.


If your leisure served, I would speak with you.


In private?


If it please you, yet Count Claudio may hear, for what I would speak of,
concerns him


What Is the matter?


Means your Lordship to be married to morrow?


You know he does.


I know not that when he knows what I know.


If there be any impediment, I pray you discover it.


You may think I love you not, let that appear hereafter, and aim better at
me by that I now will manifest, for my brother (I think, he holds you well,
and in dearness of heart) has help to effect your ensuing marriage: surely
suit ill spent, and labor ill bestowed


Why, what is the matter?


I came hither to tell you, and circumstances shortened, (for she has been too
long a talking of) the Lady is disloyal


Who Hero?


Even she, Leonatoes Hero, your Hero, every man's Hero.


Disloyal?


The word is too good to paint out her wickedness, I could say she were worse,
think you of a worse title, and I will fit her to it: wonder not till further
warrant: go but with me to night, you shall see her chamber window entered,
even the night before her wedding day, if you love her, then to morrow wed her:
But it would better fit your honor to change your mind


May this be so?


I will not think it.


If you dare not trust that you see, confess not that you know: if you will
follow me, I will show you enough, and when you have seen more, and heard
more, proceed accordingly


If I see any thing to night, why I should not marry her to morrow in the
congregation, where I should wedde, there will I shame her


And as I wooed for thee to obtain her, I will join with thee to disgrace her.


I will disparage her no farther, till you are my witnesses, bear it coldly
but till night, and let the issue show it self


O day untowardly turned!


O mischief strangely thwarting!


O plague right well prevented! so will you say, when you have seen the
sequel


Are you good men and true?


Yea, or else it were pity but they should suffer salvation body and soul.


Nay, that were a punishment too good for them, if they should have any
allegiance in them, being chosen for the Princes watch


Well, give them their charge, neighbor Dogbery.


First, who think you the most desartlesse man to be Constable?


Hugh Ote-cake sir, or George Sea-coale, for they can write and read.


Come hither neighbor Sea-coale, God has blessed you with a good name: to be a
wel-fauoured man, is the gift of Fortune, but to write and read, comes by
Nature


Both which Master Constable


You have: I knew it would be your answer: well, for your favor sir, why give
God thanks, and make no boast of it, and for your writing and reading, let
that appear when there is no need of such vanity, you are thought here to be
the most senseless and fit man for the Constable of the watch: therefore bear
you the lantern: this is your charge: You shall comprehend all vagrom men,
you are to bid any man stand in the Princes name


How if a will not stand?


Why then take no note of him, but let him go, and presently call the rest of
the Watch together, and thank God you are rid of a knave


If he will not stand when he is bidden, he is none of the Princes subjects.


True, and they are to meddle with none but the Princes subjects: you shall
also make no noise in the streets: for, for the Watch to babble and talk, is
most tolerable, and not to be endured


We will rather sleep than talk, we know what belongs to a Watch.


Why you speak like an ancient and most quiet watchman, for I cannot see how
sleeping should offend: only have a care that your bills be not stolen: well,
you are to call at all the Alehouses, and bid them that are drunk get them to
bed


How if they will not?


Why then let them alone till they are sober, if they make you not then the
better answer, you may say, they are not the men you took them for


Well sir.


If you meet a thief, you may suspect him, by virtue of your office, to be no
true man* and for such kind of men, the less you meddle or make with them,
why the more is for your honesty


If we know him to be a thief, shall we not lay hands on him.


Truly by your office you may, but I think they that touch pitch will be
defiled: the most peaceable way for you, if you do take a thief, is, to let
him show himself what he is, and steal out of your company


You have bin always called a merciful man partner.


Truly I would not hang a dog by my will, much more a man who has any
honesty in him


If you hear a child cry in the night you must call to the nurse, and bid her
still it


How if the nurse be asleep and will not hear us?


Why then depart in peace, and let the child wake her with crying, for the ewe
that will not hear her Lamb when it baes, will never answer a calfe when he
bleates


It Is very true.


This is the end of the charge: you constable are to present the Princes own
person, if you meet the Prince in the night, you may stay him


Nay birladie that I think a cannot.


Five shillings to one on it with any man that knows the Statues, he may stay
him, marry not without the prince be willing, for indeed the watch ought to
offend no man, and it is an offense to stay a man against his will


Birladie I think it be so.


Ha, ah ha, well masters good night, and there be any matter of weight
chances, call up me, keep your fellows counsels, and your own, and good
night, come neighbor


Well masters, we hear our charge, let us go sit here upon the Church bench
till two, and then all to bed


One word more, honest neighbors. I pray you watch about signior Leonatoes
door, for the wedding being there to morrow, there is a great coil to night,
adieu, be vigitant I beseech you


What, Conrade?


Peace, stir not.


Conrade I say.


Here man, I am at thy elbow.


Mas and my elbow itcht, I thought there would a scabbe follow.


I will owe thee an answer* for that, and now forward with thy tale.


Stand thee close then under this penthouse, for it drissels rain, and I will,
like a true drunkard, utter all to thee


Some treason masters, yet stand close.


Therefore know, I have earned of Don John a thousand Ducates.


Is it possible that any villainy should be so dear?


Thou should rather ask if it were possible any villainy should be so
rich? for when rich villains have need of poor ones, poor ones may make what
price they will


I wonder at it.


That shows thou art vnconfirm'd, thou know that the fashion of a doublet,
or a hat, or a cloak, is nothing to a man


Yes, it is apparel.


I mean the fashion.


Yes the fashion is the fashion.


Tush, I may as well say the foole's the fool, but see thou not what a
deformed thief this fashion is


I know that deformed, a has bin a vile thief, this vii. years, a goes up and
down like a gentle man: I remember his name


Did thou not hear some body?


No, 'twas the vain on the house.


See thou not (I say) what a deformed thief this fashion is, how giddily a
turns about all the Hot-blouds, between fourteen and five and thirty,
sometimes fashioning them like Pharaoes soldiers in the rechie painting,
sometime like god Bells priests in the old Church window, sometime like the
shaven Hercules in the smircht worm eaten tapestrie, where his cod-peece seems
as massy as his club


All this I see, and see that the fashion wears out more apparel then the
man; but art not thou thy self giddie with the fashion too that thou have
shifted out of thy tale into telling me of the fashion


Not so neither, but know that I have to night wooed Margaret the Lady Heroes
gentlewoman, by the name of Hero, she leanes me out at her mistress
chamber-vvindow, bids me a thousand times good night: I tell this tale vildly.
I should first tell thee how the Prince Claudio and my Master planted, and
placed, and possessed by my Master Don John, saw a far off in the Orchard this
amiable encounter


And thought thy Margaret was Hero?


Two of them did, the Prince and Claudio, but the devil my Master knew she was
Margaret and partly by his oaths, which first possessed them, partly by the
dark night which did deceive them, but chiefly, by my villainy, which did
confirm any slander that Don John had made, away went Claudio enraged, swore
he would meet her as he was appointed next morning at the Temple, and there,
before the whole congregation shame her with what he saw over night, and send
her home again without a husband


We charge you in the Princes name stand.


Call up the right master Constable, we have here recovered the most dangerous
piece of lechery, that ever was known in the Commonwealth


And one Deformed is one of them, I know him, a wears a lock.


Mast^ masters.


Your be made bring deformed forth I warrant you,


Masters, never speak, we charge you, let us obey you to go with us.


We are like to prove a goodly commodity, being taken up of these men's bills.


A commodity in question I warrant you, come we will obey you.


Good Vrsula wake my cousin Beatrice, and desire her to rise.


I will Lady.


And bid her come hither.


Well.


Troth I think your other rebato were better.


No pray thee good Meg, I Will wear this.


By my troth's not so good, and I vvarrant your cousin will say so.


My cosin's a fool, and thou art another, i will wear none but this.


I like the new tire within excellently, if the hair were a thought browner:
and your gown's a most rare fashion in faith, I saw the Duchess of Millaines
gown that they praise so


O that exceedes they say.


By my troth's but a night-gowne in respect of yours, cloth a gold and cuts and
laced with silver, set with pearls, down sleeves, side sleeves, and skirts,
round vnderborn with a bluish tinsel, but for a fine queint graceful and
excellent fashion, yours is worth ten on it


God give me joy to wear it, for my heart is exceeding heavy.


'Twill be heavier soon, by the weight of a man.


Fie upon thee, art not ashamed?


Of what Lady? of speaking honorably? is not marriage honorable in a beggar?
is not your Lord honorable without marriage? I think you would have me say,
saving your reverence a husband: and bad thinking do not wrest true speaking,
I Will offend no body, is there any harm in the heavier for a husband? none I
think, and it be the right husband, and the right wife, otherwise it is light
and not heavy, ask my Lady Beatrice else, here she comes


Good morrow Coze.


Good morrow sweet Hero.


Why how now? do you speak in the sick tune?


I am out of all other tune, me thinks.


Claps into Light a love, (that goes without a burden,) do you sing it and I Will
dance it


Ye Light aloue with your heels, then if your husband have stables enough,
you will look he shall lack no barnes


O illegitimate construction! I scorn that with my heels.


It Is almost five a clock cousin, it is time you were ready, by my troth I am
exceeding ill, hey ho


For a hawk, a horse, or a husband?


For the letter that begins them all, H.


Well, and you be not turned Turk, there is no more sailing by the star.


What means the fool trow?


Nothing I, but God send every one rheir hearts desire.


These gloves the Count sent me, they are an excellent perfume.


I am stuffed cousin, I cannot smell.


A maid and stuffed! there is goodly catching of cold.


O God help me, God help me, how long have you professed apprehension?


Ever since you left it, does not my wit become me rarely?


It is not seen enough, you should wear it in your cap, by my troth I am
sick


Get you some of this distilled carduus benedictus and lay it to your heart, it
is the only thing for a qualm


There thou prickst her with a thissell.


Benedictus, why benedictus? you have some moral in this benedictus.


Moral? no by my troth, I have no moral meaning, I meant plain holy
thissell, you may think perchance that I think you are in love, nay birlady I
am not such a fool to think what I list, nor I list not to think what I can,
nor indeed I cannot think, if I would think my heart out of thinking, that you
are in love, or that you will be in love, or that you can be in love: yet
Benedicke was such another, and now is he become a man, he swore he would
never marry, and yet now in despite of his heart he eats his meat without
grudging, and how you may be converted I know not, but me thinks you look
with your eyes as other women do


What pace is this that thy tongue keeps.


Not a false gallop.


Madam, withdraw, the Prince, the Count, signior Benedicke, Don John, and all
the gallants of the town are come to fetch you to Church


Help to dress me good coze, good Meg, good Vrsula.


What would you with me, honest neighbor?


Mary sir I would have some confidence with you, that decernes you nearely.


Brief I pray you, for you see it is a busy time with me.


Mary this it is sir.


Yes in truth it is sir.


What is it my good friends?


Goodman Verges sir speaks a little of the matter, an old man sir, and his
wits are not so blunt, as God help I would desire they were, but infaith
honest as the skin between his brows


Yes I thank God, I am as honest as any man living, that is an old man, and no
honester then I


Comparisons are odorous, palabras, neighbor Verges.


Neighbors, you are tedious.


It pleases your worship to say so, but we are the poor Dukes officers, but
truly for mine own part, if I were as tedious as a King I could find in my
heart to bestow it all of your worship


All thy tediousness on me, ah?


Yea, and 'twere a thousand times more than it is, for I hear as good
exclamation on your Worship as of any man in the City, and though I be but a
poor man, I am glad to hear it


And so am I.


I would feign know what you have to say.


Marry sir our watch to night, excepting your worships presence, have taken a
couple of as arrant knaves as any in Messina


A good old man sir, he will be talking as they say, when the age is in the
wit is out, God help us, it is a world to see: well said in faith neighbor
Verges, well, God's a good man, and two men ride of a horse, one must ride
behind, an honest soul in faith sir, by my troth he is, as ever broke bread,
but God is to be worshipped, all men are not alike, alas good neighbor


Indeed neighbor he comes too short of you.


Gifts that God gives.


I must leave you.


One word sir, our watch sir have indeed comprehended two aspitious persons,
and we would have them this morning examined before your worship


Take their examination your self, and bring it me, I am now in great haste,
as may appear unto you


It shall be suffigance.


Drink some wine ere you go: fare you well.


My Lord, they stay for you to give your daughter to her husband.


I Will wait upon them, I am ready.


Go good partner, go get you to Francis Sea-coale, bid him bring his pen and
inkehorne to the Jail: we are now to examine those men


And we must do it wisely.


We will spare for no wit I warrant you: here is that shall drive some of
them to a non-come, only get the learned writer to set down our
excommunication, and meet me at the Iaile


Come Friar Francis, be brief, only to the plain form of marriage, and you
shall recount their particular duties afterward


You come hither, my Lord, to marry this Lady.


No.


To be married to her: Friar, you come to marry her.


Lady, you come hither to be married to this Count.


I do.


If either of you know any inward impediment why you should not be conjoined, I
charge you on your souls to utter it


Know you any, Hero?


None my Lord.


Know you any, Count?


I dare make his answer, None.


O what men dare do! what men may do! what men daily do!


How now! interiections? why then, some be of laughing, as ha, ha, he.


Stand thee by Friar, father, by your leave,
Will you with free and unconstrained soul
Give me this maid your daughter?

As freely son as God did give her me.


And what have I to give you back, whose worth
May counterpoise this rich and precious gift?

Nothing, unless you render her again.


Sweet Prince, you learn me noble thankfulness:
There Leonato, take her back again,
Give not this rotten Orange to your friend,
She Is but the sign and semblance of her honor:
Behold how like a maid she blushes here!
O what authority and show of truth
Can cunning sin cover it self withal!
Comes not that blood, as modest evidence,
To witness simple Virtue? would you not swear
All you that see her, that she were a maid,
By these exterior shows? But she is none:
She knows the heat of a luxurious bed:
Her blush is guiltiness, not modesty.

What do you mean, my Lord?


Not to be married,
Not to knit my soul to an approved wanton.

Dear my Lord, if you in your own proof,
Have vanquished the resistance of her youth,
And made defeat of her virginity.

I know what you would say: if I have known her,
You will say, she did embrace me as a husband,
And so extenuate the forehand sin: No Leonato,
I never tempted her with word too large,
But as a brother to his sister, showed
Bashful sincerity and comely love.

And seemed I ever otherwise to you?


Out on thee seeming, I will write against it,
You seem to me as Diane in her Orb,
As chaste as is the budde ere it be blown:
But you are more intemperate in your blood,
Than Venus, or those pampred animalls,
That rage in savage sensuality.

Is my Lord well, that he does speak so wide?


Sweet Prince, why speak not you?


What should I speak?
I stand dishonored that have gone about,
To link my dear friend to a common stale.

Are these things spoken, or do I but dream?


Sir, they are spoken, and these things are true.


This looks not like a nuptial.


True, O God!


Leonato, stand I here?
Is this the Prince? is this the Princes brother?
Is this face Heroes? are our eyes our own?

All this is so, but what of this my Lord?


Let me but move one question to your daughter,
And by that fatherly and kindly power,
That you have in her, bid her answer truly.

I charge thee do, as thou art my child.


O God defend me how am I beset,
What kind of catechizing call you this?

To make you answer truly to your name.


Is it not Hero? who can blot that name
With any just reproach?

Marry that can Hero,
Hero it self can blot out Heroes virtue.
What man was he, talked with you yesternight,
Out at your window betwixt twelve and one?
Now if you are a maid, answer to this.

I talked with no man at that hour my Lord.


Why then you are no maiden. Leonato,
I am sorry you must hear: upon mine honor,
My self, my brother, and this grieved Count
Did see her, hear her, at that hour last night,
Talk with a ruffian at her chamber window,
Who has indeed most like a liberal villain,
Confessed the vile encounters they have had
A thousand times in secret.

Fie, fie, they are not to be named my Lord,
Not to be spoken of,
There is not chastity enough in language,
Without offense to utter them: thus pretty Lady
I am sorry for thy much misgouernment.

O Hero! what a Hero had thou been
If half thy outward graces had been placed
About thy thoughts and counsels of thy heart?
But fare thee well, most foul, most fair, farewell
Thou pure impiety, and impious purity,
For thee I Will lock up all the gates of Love,
And on my eie-lids shall Conjecture hang,
To turn all beauty into thoughts of harm,
And never shall it more be gracious.

Has no man's dagger here a point for me?


Why how now cousin, wherefore sink you down?


Come, let us go: these things come thus to light,
Smother her spirits up.

How does the Lady?


Dead I think, help uncle,
Hero, why Hero, Uncle, Signor Benedicke, Friar.

O Fate! take not away thy heavy hand,
Death is the fairest cover for her shame
That may be wished for.

How now cousin Hero?


Have comfort Lady.


Do thou look up?


Yea, wherefore should she not?


Wherefore? Why does not every earthly thing
Cry shame upon her? Could she here deny
The story that is printed in her blood?
Do not live Hero, do not open thine eyes:
For did I think thou would not quickly die,
Thought I thy spirits were stronger then thy shames,
My self would on the reward of reproaches
Strike at thy life. Grieved I, I had but one?
Chid I, for that at frugal Natures frame?
O one too much by thee: why had I one?
Why ever was it thou lovely in my eyes?
Why had I not with charitable hand
Took up a beggars issue at my gates,
Who smeered thus, and mir'd with infamy,
I might have said, no part of it is mine:
This shame deriues it self from unknown loins,
But mine, and mine I loved, and mine I praised,
And mine that I was proud on mine so much,
That I my self, was to my self not mine:
Valewing of her, why she, O she is fallen
Into a pit of Ink, that the wide sea
Has drops too few to wash her clean again,
And salt too little, which may season give
To her foul tainted flesh.

Sir, sir, be patient: for my part, I am so attired in wonder, I know not what
to say


O on my soul my cousin is belied.


Lady, were you her bedfellow last night?


No truly: not although until last night,
I have this tweluemonth bin her bedfellow.

Confirmed, confirmed, O that is stronger made
Which was before barred up with ribs of iron.
Would the Princes lie, and Claudio lie,
Who loved her so, that speaking of her foulness,
Washed it with tears? Hence from her, let her die.

Hear me a little, for I have only been silent so long, and given way unto
this course of fortune, by noting of the Lady, I have marked

A thousand blushing apparitions,
To start into her face, a thousand innocent shames,
In Angel whiteness bear away those blushes,
And in her eye there has appeared a fire
To burn the errors that these Princes hold
Against her maiden truth. Call me a fool,
Trust not my reading, nor my observations,
Which with experimental seal does warrant
The tenure of my book: trust not my age,
My reverence, calling, nor divinity,
If this sweet Lady lie not guiltless here,
Under some biting error.

Friar, it cannot be:
Thou see that all the Grace that she has left,
Is, that she will not add to her damnation,
A sin of perjury, she not denies it:
Why seek'st thou then to cover with excuse,
That which appears in proper nakedness?

Lady, what man is he you are accused of?


They know that do accuse me, I know none:
If I know more of any man alive
Then that which maiden modesty does warrant,
Let all my sins lack mercy. O my Father,
Prove you that any man with me conuerst,
At hours unmeet, or that I yesternight
Maintained the change of words with any creature,
Refuse me, hate me, torture me to death.

There is some strange misprision in the Princes.


Two of them have the very bent of honor,
And if their wisdoms be misled in this:
The practice of it lives in John the bastard,
Whose spirits toil in frame of villainies.

I know not: if they speak but truth of her,
These hands shall tear her: If they wrong her honor,
The proudest of them shall well hear of it.
Time has not yet so dried this blood of mine,
Nor age so eat up my invention,
Nor Fortune made such havoc of my means,
Nor my bad life rest me so much of friends,
But they shall find, awaked in such a kind,
Both strength of limb, and policy of mind,
Ability in means, and choice of friends,
To quit me of them thoroughly.

Pause awhile:
And let my counsel sway you in this case,
Your daughter here the Princess (left for dead)
Let her awhile be secretly kept in,
And publish it, that she is dead indeed:
Maintain a mourning ostentation,
And on your Families old monument,
Hang mournful Epitaphes, and do all rites,
That appertain unto a burial.

What shall become of this? What will this do?


Marry this well carried, shall on her behalf,
Change slander to remorse, that is some good,
But not for that dream I on this strange course,
But on this travail look for greater birth:
She dying, as it must be so maintained,
Upon the instant that she was accused,
Shall be lamented, pitied, and excused
Of every hearer: for it so falls out,
That what we have, we prize not to the worth,
Whiles we enjoy it; but being lacked and lost,
Why then we rack the value, then we find
The virtue that possession would not show us
Whiles it was ours, so will it fare with Claudio:
When he shall hear she dyed upon his words,
The Idea of her life shall sweetly creep
Into his study of imagination.
And every lovely Organ of her life,
Shall come apparel'd in more precious habit:
More moving delicate, and full of life,
Into the eye and prospect of his soul
Then when she lived indeed: then shall he mourn,
If ever Love had interest in his Liver,
And wish he had not so accused her:
No, though he thought his accusation true:
Let this be so, and doubt not but success
Will fashion the event in better shape,
Then I can lay it down in likelihood.
But if all aim but this be leuelld false,
The supposition of the Ladies death,
Will quench the wonder of her infamy.
And if it sort not well, you may conceal her,
As best befits her wounded reputation,
In some reclusiue and religious life,
Out of all eyes, tongues, minds and injuries.

Signior Leonato, let the Friar advise you,
And though you know my inwardnesse and love
Is very much unto the Prince and Claudio.
Yet, by mine honor, I will deal in this*
As secretly and justly, as your soul
Should with your body.

Being that I flow in grief,
The smallest twine may lead me.

It Is well consented, presently away,
For to strange sores, strangely they strain the cure,
Come Lady, die to live, this wedding day
Perhaps is but prolonged, have patience and endure.

Lady Beatrice, have you wept all this while?


Yea, and I will weep a while longer.


I will not desire that.


You have no reason, I do it freely.


Surely I do believe your fair cousin is wronged.


Ah, how much might the man deserve of me that would right her!


Is there any way to show such friendship?


A very even way, but no such friend.


May a man do it?


It is a man's office, but not yours.


I do love nothing in the world so well as you, is not that strange?


As strange as the thing I know not, it were as possible for me to say, I loved
nothing so well as you, but believe me not, and yet I lie not, I confess
nothing, nor I deny nothing, I am sorry for my cousin


By my sword Beatrice thou love me.


Do not swear by it and eat it.


I will swear by it that you love me, and I will make him eat it that says I
love not you


Will you not eat your word?


With no sauce that can be devised to it, I protest I love thee.


Why then God forgive me.


What offense sweet Beatrice?


You have stayed me in a happy hour; I was about to protest I loved you.


And do it with all thy heart.


I love you with so much of my heart, that none is left to protest.


Come, bid me do any thing for thee.


Kill Claudio.


Ha, not for the wide world.


You kill me to deny, farewell.


Tarry sweet Beatrice.


I am gone, though I am here, there is no love in you, nay I pray you let me
go


Beatrice.


Infaith I will go.


We Will be friends first.


You dare easier be friends with me, than fight with mine enemy.


Is Claudio thine enemy?


Is a not approved in the height a villain, that has slandered, scorned,
dishonored my kinswoman? O that I were a man! what, bear her in hand until
they come to take hands, and then with public accusation uncovered slander,
vnmittigated rancour? O God that I were a man! I would eat his heart in the
marketplace


Hear me Beatrice.


Talk with a man out at a window, a proper saying.


Nay but Beatrice.


Sweet Hero, she is wronged, she is slandered, she is undone.


Beat?


Princes and Counties! surely a Princely testimony, a goodly Count, Comfect,
a sweet Gallant surely, O that I were a man for his sake! or that I had any
friend would be a man for my sake! But manhood is melted into cursies, valor
into complement, and men are only turned into tongue, and trim ones too: he
is now as valiant as Hercules, that only tells a lie, and swears it: I cannot
be a man with wishing, therefore I will die a woman with grieuing


Tarry good Beatrice, by this hand I love thee.


Use it for my love some other way then swearing by it.


Think you in your soul the Count Claudio has wronged Hero?


Yea, as sure as I have a thought, or a soul.


Enough, I am engagde, I will challenge him, I will kiss your hand, and so
leave you: by this hand Claudio shall render me a dear account: as you hear
of me, so think of me: go comfort your coosin, I must say she is dead, and so
farewell


Is our whole dissembly appeard?


O a stool and a cushion for the Sexton.


Which be the malefactors?


Marry that am I, and my partner.


Nay that is certain, we have the exhibition to examine.


But which are the offenders that are to be examined, let them come before
master Constable


Yea marry, let them come before me, what is your name, friend?


Borachio.


Pray write down Borachio. Yours sir.


I am a Gentleman sir, and my name is Conrade.


Write down Master gentleman Conrade^: masters, do you serve God: masters,
it is proved already that you are little better than false knaves, and it will
go near to be thought so shortly, how answer you for your selves


Marry sir, we say we are none.


A marvelous witty fellow I assure you, but I will go about with him: come
you hither sir, a word in your ear sir, I say to you, it is thought you are
false knaves


Sir, I say to you, we are none.


Well, stand aside, before God they are both in a tale: have you writ down that
they are none


Master Constable, you go not the way to examine, you must call forth the
watch that are their accusers


Yea marry, that is the eftest way, let the watch come forth: masters, I charge
you in the Princes name, accuse these men


This man said sir, that Don John the Princes brother was a villain.


Write down, Prince John a villain: why this is flat perjury, to call a
Princes brother villain


Master Constable.


Pray thee fellow peace, I do not like thy look I promise thee.


What heard you him say else?


Mary that he had received a thousand Dukates of Don John, for accusing the
Lady Hero wrongfully


Flat Burglarie as ever was committed.


Yea by the mass that it is.


What else fellow?


And that Count Claudio did mean upon his words, to disgrace Hero before the
whole assembly, and not marry her


O villain! thou will be condemned into everlasting redemption for this.


What else?


This is all.


And this is more masters then you can deny, Prince John is this morning
secretly stolen away: Hero was in this manner accused, in this very manner
refused, and upon the grief of this suddenly died: Master Constable, let
these men be bound, and brought to Leonato, I will go before, and show him
their examination


Come, let them be opinion'd.


Let them be in the hands of Coxcombe.


Gods my life, where is the Sexton? let him write down the Princes Officer
Coxcombe: come, bind them thou naughty varlet


Away, you are an ass, you are an ass.


Do thou not suspect my place? do thou not suspect my years? O that he
were here to write me down an ass! but masters, remember that I am an ass:
though it be not written down, yet forget not yt I am an ass: No thou
villain, you art full of piety as shall be proved upon thee by good witness, I
am a wise fellow, and which is more, an officer, and which is more, a
houshoulder, and which is more, as pretty a piece of flesh as any in Messina,
and one that knows the Law, go to, and a rich fellow enough, go to, and a
fellow that has had losses, and one that has two gowns, and every thing
handsome about him: bring him away: O that I had been writ down an ass


If you go on thus, you will kill your self,
And it is not wisdom thus to second grief,
Against your self.

I pray thee cease thy counsel,
Which falls into mine ears as profitlesse,
As water in a sieve: give not me counsel,
Nor let no comfort delight mine ear,
But such a one whose wrongs does suit with mine.
Bring me a father that so loved his child,
Whose joy of her is ouer-whelmed like mine,
And bid him speak of patience,
Measure his woe the length and breadth of mine,
And let it answer every strain for strain,
As thus for thus, and such a grief for such,
In every lineament, branch, shape, and form:
If such a one will smile and stroke his beard,
And sorrow, wagge, cry hem, when he should groan,
Patch grief with proverbs, make misfortune drunk,
With candle-wasters: bring him yet to me,
And I of him will gather patience:
But there is no such man for brother, men
Can counsel, and speak comfort to that grief,
Which they themselves not feel, but to sting it,
Their counsel turns to passion, which before,
Would give preceptiall medicine to rage,
Fetter strong madness in a silken thread,
Charm ache with air, and agony with words,
No, no, it is all men's office, to speak patience
To those that wring under the load of sorrow:
But no man's virtue nor sufficiency
To be so moral, when he shall endure
The like himself: therefore give me no counsel,
My griefs cry louder then advertisement.

Therein do men from children nothing differ.


I pray thee peace, I will be flesh and blood,
For there was never yet Philosopher,
That could endure the tooth-ake patiently,
How ever they have writ the style of gods,
And made a push at chance and sufferance.

Yet bend not all the harm upon your self,
Make those that do offend you, suffer too.

There thou speak reason, nay I will do so,
My soul does tell me, Hero is belied,
And that shall Claudio know, so shall the Prince,
And all of them that thus dishonor her.

Here comes the Prince and Claudio hastily.


Good den, good den.


Good day to both of you.


Hear you my Lords?


We have some haste Leonato.


Some haste my Lord! well, fareyouwel my Lord,
Are you so hasty now? well, all is one.

Nay, do not quarrel with us, good old man.


If he could rite himself with quarrelling,
Some of us would lie low.

Who wrongs him?


Marry you do wrong me, thou dissembler, thou:
Nay, never lay thy hand upon thy sword,
I fear thee not.

Marry beshrew my hand,
If it should give your age such cause of fear,
Infaith my hand meant nothing to my sword.

Tush, tush, man, never fleere and jest at me,
I speak not like a do^ard, nor a fool,
As under privilege of age to brag,
What I have done being young, or what would do,
Were I not old, know Claudio to thy head,
Thou have so wronged my innocent child and me,
That I am forced to lay my reverence by,
And with gray hairs and bruise of many days,
Do challenge thee to trial of a man,
I say thou have belied mine innocent child.
Thy slander has gone through and through her heart,
And she lies buried with her ancestors:
O in a tomb where never scandal slept,
Save this of hers, framed by thy villainy.

My villainy?


Thine Claudio, thine I say.


You say not right old man.


My Lord, my Lord,
I Will prove it on his body if he dare,
Despite his nice fence, and his active practice,
His May of youth, and bloome of lustihood.

Away, I will not have to do with you.


Can thou so daffe me? thou have killed my child,
If thou kilst me, boy, thou shall kill a man.

He shall kill two of us, and men indeed,
But that is no matter, let him kill one first:
Win me and wear me, let him answer me,
Come follow me boy, come sir boy, come follow me
Sir boy, i will whip you from your foyning fence,
Nay, as I am a gentleman, I will.

Brother.


Content your self, God knows I loved my niece,
And she is dead, slandered to death by villains,
That dare as well answer a man indeed,
As I dare take a serpent by the tongue.
Boys, apes, braggarts, Iackes, milke-sops.

Brother Anthony.


Hold you content, what man? I know them, yea
And what they weigh, even to the utmost scruple,
Scambling, out-facing, fashion-monging boys,
That lie, and cog, and flout, deprave, and slander,
Go antiquely, and show outward hidiousnesse,
And speak of half a dozen dangerous words,
How they might hurt their enemies, if they durst.
And this is all.

But brother Anthony.


Come, it is no matter,
Do not you meddle, let me deal in this.

Gentlemen both, we will not wake your patience
My heart is sorry for your daughters death:
But on my honor she was charged with nothing
But what was true, and very full of proof.

My Lord, my Lord.


I will not hear you.


No come brother, away, I will be heard.


And shall, or some of us will smart for it.


See, see, here comes the man we went to seek.


Now signior, what news?


Good day my Lord.


Welcome signior, you are almost come to part almost a fray.


We had likt to have had our two noses snapt off with two old men without
teeth


Leonato and his brother, what think thou? had we fought, I doubt we should
have been too young for them


In a false quarrel there is no true valor, I came to seek you both.


We have been up and down to seek thee, for we are high proof melancholy,
and would feign have it beaten away, will thou use thy wit


It is in my scabberd, shall I draw it?


Do thou wear thy wit by thy side?


Never any did so, though very many have been beside their wit, I will bid
thee draw, as we do the minstrels, draw to pleasure us


As I am an honest man he looks pale, art thou sick, or angry?


What, courage man: what though care killed a cat, thou have mettle enough in
thee to kill care


Sir, I shall meet your wit in the careere, and you charge it against me, I
pray you choose another subject


Nay then give him another staff, this last was broke cross.


By this light, he changes more and more, I think he be angry indeed.


If he be, he knows how to turn his girdle.


Shall I speak a word in your ear?


God bless me from a challenge.


You are a villain, I jest not, I will make it good how you dare, with what
you dare, and when you dare: do me right, or I will protest your cowardice: you
have killed a sweet Lady, and her death shall fall heavy on you, let me
hear from you


Well, I will meet you, so I may have good cheer.


What, a feast, a feast?


I faith I thank him, he has bid me to a calves head and a Capon, the which
if I do not carue most curiously, say my knife's naught, shall I not find a
woodcocke too


Sir, your wit ambles well, it goes easily.


I Will tell thee how Beatrice praised thy wit the other day: I said thou had a
fine wit: true says she, a fine little one: no said I, a great wit: right
says she, a great gross one: nay said I, a good wit: just said she, it hurts
no body: nay said I, the gentleman is wise: certain said she, a wise gentleman:
nay said I, he has the tongues: that I believe said she, for he swore a
thing to me on monday night, which he forswore on tuesday morning: there is a
double tongue, there is two tongues: thus did she an hour together trans-shape
thy particular virtues, yet at last she concluded with a sigh, thou wast the
proprest man in Italy


For the which she wept heartily, and said she cared not.


Yea that she did, but yet for all that, and if she did not hate him deadly,
she would love him dearly, the old man's daughter told us all


All, all, and moreover, God saw him when he was hid in the garden.


But when shall we set the savage Bulls horns on the sensible Benedicks head?


Yea and text underneath, here dwells Benedicke the married man.


Fare you well, Boy, you know my mind, I will leave you now to your
gossep-like humor, you break jests as braggards do their blades, which God be
thanked hurt not: my Lord, for your many courtesies I thank you, I must
discontinue your company, your brother the Bastard is fled from Messina: you
have among you, killed a sweet and innocent Lady: for my Lord Lackebeard
there, he and I shall meet, and till then peace be with him


He is in earnest.


In most profound earnest, and I Will warrant you, for the love of Beatrice.


And has challenged thee.


Most sincerely.


What a pretty thing man is, when he goes in his doublet and hose, and leaves
off his wit


He is then a Giant to an Ape, but then is an Ape a Doctor to such a man.


But soft you, let me be, pluck up my heart, and be sad, did he not say my
brother was fled


Come you sir, if justice cannot tame you, she shall nere weigh more reasons
in her balance, nay, and you be a cursing hypocrite once, you must be looked to


How now, two of my brothers men bound? Borachio one.


Harken after their offense my Lord*


Officers, what offense have these men done?


Marry sir, they have committed false report, moreover they have spoken
untruths, secondarily they are slanders, sixth and lastly, they have belyed a
Lady, thirdly, they have verified unjust things, and to conclude they are
lying knaves


First I ask thee what they have done, thirdly I ask thee what is their
offense, sixth and lastly why they are committed, and to conclude, what you lay
to their charge


Rightly reasoned, and in his own division, and by my troth there is one
meaning well suited


Who have you offended masters, that you are thus bound to your answer? this
learned Constable is too cunning to be understood, what is your offense


Sweet Prince, let me go no farther to mine answer: do you hear me, and let
this Count kill me: I have deceived even your very eyes: what your wisdoms
could not discover, these shallow fools have brought to light, who in the
night ouerheard me confessing to this man, how Don John your brother incensed
me to slander the Lady Hero, how you were brought into the Orchard, and saw me
court Margaret in Heroes garments, how you disgraced her when you should
marry her: my villainy they have upon record, which I had rather seal with
my death, then repeat over to my shame: the Lady is dead upon mine and my
masters false accusation: and briefly, I desire nothing but the reward of a
villain


Runs not this speech like iron through your blood?


I have drunk poison whiles he vtter'd it.


But did my Brother set thee on to this?


Yea, and paid me richly for the practice of it.


He is composed and framed of treachery,
And fled he is upon this villainy.

Sweet Hero, now thy image does appear
In the rare semblance that I loved it first.

Come, bring away the plaintiffes, by this time our Sexton has reformed
Signior Leonato of the matter: and masters, do not forget to specify when time
and place shall serve, that I am an Ass


Here, here comes master Signior Leonato, and the Sexton too.


Which is the villain? let me see his eyes,
That when I note another man like him,
I may avoid him: which of these is he?

If you would know your wronger, look on me.


Art thou thou the slave that with thy breath have killed mine innocent child?


Yea, even I alone.


No, not so villain, thou belieft thy self,
Here stand a pair of honorable men,
A third is fled that had a hand in it:
I thank you Princes for my daughters death,
Record it with your high and worthy deeds,
'Twas bravely done, if you bethink you of it.

I know not how to pray your patience,
Yet I must speak, choose your revenge your self,
Impose me to what penance your invention
Can lay upon my sin, ye sinned I not,
But in mistaking.

By my soul nor I,
And yet to satisfy this good old man,
I would bend under any heavy weight,
That heel enjoin me to.

I cannot bid you bid my daughter live,
That were impossible, but I pray you both,
Possess the people in Messina here,
How innocent she died, and if your love
Can labor aught in sad invention,
Hang her an epitaph upon her toomb,
And sing it to her bones, sing it to night:
To morrow morning come you to my house,
And since you could not be my son in law,
Be yet my Nephew: my brother has a daughter,
Almost the copy of my child that is dead,
And she alone is heir to both of us,
Give her the right you should have given her cousin,
And so dies my revenge.

O noble sir!
Your over kindness does wring tears from me,
I do embrace your offer, and dispose
For henceforth of poor Claudio.

To morrow then I will expect your coming,
To night I take my leave, this naughty man
Shall face to face be brought to Margaret,
Who I believe was packt in all this wrong,
Hired to it by your brother.

No by my soul she was not,
Nor knew not what she did when she spoke to me,
But always has bin just and virtuous,
In any thing that I do know by her.

Moreover sir, which indeed is not under white and black, this plaintiff
here, the offendour did call me ass, I beseech you let it be remembered in his
punishment, and also the vvatch heard them talk of one Deformed, they say he
wears a key in his ear and a lock hanging by it, and borrowes money in Gods
name, the which he has used so long, and never paid, that now men grow
hard-harted and will lend nothing for Gods sake: pray you examine him upon
that point


I thank thee for thy care and honest pains.


Your worship speaks like a most thankful and reverend youth, and I praise
God for you


There Is for thy pains.


God save the foundation.


Go, I discharge thee of thy prisoner, and I thank thee.


I leave an arrant knave with your worship, which I beseech your worship to
correct your self, for the example of others: God keep your worship, I wish
your worship well, God restore you to health, I humbly give you leave to
depart, and if a merry meeting may be wished, God prohibit it: come neighbor


Until to morrow morning, Lords, farewell.


Farewell my Lords, we look for you to morrow.


We will not fail.


To night i will mourn with Hero:


Bring you these fellows on, weel talk with Margaret, how her acquaintance
grew with this lewd fellow


Pray thee sweet Mistress Margaret, deserve well at my hands, by helping me
to the speech of Beatrice


Will you then write me a Sonnet in praise of my beauty?


In so high a style Margaret, that no man living shall come over it, for in
most comely truth thou deseruest it


To have no man come over me, why, shall I always keep below stairs?


Thy wit is as quick as the greyhounds mouth, it catches.


And yours, as blunt as the Fencers foiles, which hit, but hurt not.


A most manly wit Margaret, it will not hurt a woman: and so I pray thee call
Beatrice, I give thee the bucklers


Give us the swords, we have bucklers of our own.


If you use them Margaret, you must put in the pikes with a vice, and they are
dangerous weapons for Maids


Well, I will call Beatrice to you, who I think has legs.


And therefore will come. The God of love that sits above, and knows me, and
knows me, how pitiful I deserve. I mean in singing, but in loving, Leander
the good swimmer, Tro^lous the first imploier of pandars, and a whole book
full of these quondam carpet-mongers, whose name yet run smoothly in the even
rode of a blanke verse, why they were never so truly turned over and over as
my poor self in love: marry I cannot show it rhyme, I have tried, I can find
out no rhyme to Lady but babie, an innocent rhyme: for scorn, horn, a hard
time: for school fool, a babbling time: very ominous endings, no, I was not
borne under a riming Plannet, for I cannot woo in festival terms: Beatrice
would thou come when I called thee


Yea Signior, and depart when you bid me.


O stay but till then.


Then, is spoken: fare you well now, and yet ere I go, let me go with that I
came, which is, with knowing what has past between you and Claudio


Only foul words, and thereupon I will kiss thee.


Foul words is but foul wind, and foul wind is but foul breath, and foul
breath is noisome, therefore I will depart vnkist


Thou have frighted the word out of his right sense, so forcible is thy wit,
but I must tell thee plainly, Claudio undergoes my challenge, and either I
must shortly hear from him, or I will subscribe him a coward, and I pray thee
now tell me, for which of my bad parts did thou first fall in love with me


For them all together, which maintained so politic a state of evil, that
they will not admit any good part to intermingle with them: but for which of my
good parts did you first suffer love for me


Suffer love! a good epithet, I do suffer love indeed, for I love thee
against my will


In spite of your heart I think, alas poor heart, if you spite it for my
sake, I will spite it for yours, for I will never love that which my friend
hates


Thou and I are too wise to woo peaceably.


It appears not in this confession, there is not one wise man among twenty
that will praise himself


An old, an old instance Beatrice, that lived in the time of good neighbors,
if a man do not erect in this age his own tomb ere he dies, he shall live
no longer in monuments, then the Bells ring, and the Widow weeps


And how long is that think you?


Question, why an hour in clamor and a quarter in rhewme, therefore is it most
expedient for the wife, if Don worm (his conscience) find no impediment to
the contrary, to be the trumpet of his own virtues, as I am to my self so
much for praising my self, who I my self will bear witness is praise
worthy, and now tell me, how does your cousin


Very ill.


And how do you?


Very ill too.


Serve God, love me, and mend, there will I leave you too, for here comes one
in haste


Madam, you must come to your Uncle, yonder is old coile at home, it is proved
my Lady Hero has bin falselie accusde, the Prince and Claudio mightily
abusde, and Don John is the author of all, who is fled and gone: will you come
presently


Will you go hear this news Signior?


I will hue in thy heart, die in thy lap, and be buried in thy eyes: and
moreover, I will go with thee to thy Uncles


Is this the monument of Leonato?


It is my Lord.

Done to death by slanderous tongues,
Was the Hero that here lies:
Death in guerdon of her wrongs,
Gives her fame which never dies:
So the life that dyed with shame,
Lives in death with glorious fame.
Hang thou there upon the tomb,
Praising her when I am dombe.

Now music sound and sing your solemn hymn

Pardon goddess of the night,
Those that slew thy virgin knight,
For the which with songs of woe,
Round about her tomb they go:
Midnight assist our moan, help us to sigh and groan
Heavily, heavily.
Graves yawne and yield your dead,
Till death be uttered,
Heavenly, heavenly.

Now unto thy bones good night, yearly will I do this right.


Good morrow masters, put your Torches out,
The wolves have preied, and look, the gentle day
Before the wheels of Phoebus, round about
Dapples the drowsy East with spots of gray:
Thanks to you all, and leave us, fare you well.

Good morrow masters, each his several way.


Come let us hence, and put on other weeds,
And then to Leonatoes we will go.

And Hymen now with luckier issue speeds,
Then this for whom we rendered up this woe.

Did I not tell you she was innocent?


So are the Prince and Claudio who accused her,
Upon the error that you heard debated:
But Margaret was in some fault for this,
Although against her will as it appears,
In the true course of all the question.

Well, I am glad that all things sort so well.


And so am I, being else by faith enforced
To call young Claudio to a reckoning for it.

Well daughter, and you gentlewomen all,
Withdraw into a chamber by your selves,
And when I send for you, come hither masked:
The Prince and Claudio promised by this hour
To visit me, you know your office Brother,
You must be father to your brothers daughter,
And give her to young Claudio.

Which I will do with confirmed countenance.


Friar, I must entreat your pains, I think.


To do what Signior?


To bind me, or undo me, one of them:
Signior Leonato, truth it is good Signior,
Your niece regards me with an eye of favor.

That eye my daughter lent her, it is most true.


And I do with an eye of love require her.


The sight whereof I think you had from me,
From Claudio, and the Prince, but what is your will?

Your answer sir is Enigmaticall,
But for my will, my will is, your good will
May stand with ours, this day to be conioyn'd,
In the state of honorable marriage,
In which (good Friar) I shall desire your help.

My heart is with your liking.


And my help.


Good morrow to this fair assembly.


Good morrow Prince, good morrow Claudio:
We here attend you, are you yet determined,
To day to marry with my brothers daughter?

I Will hold my mind were she an Ethiope.


Call her forth brother, here is the Friar ready.


Good morrow Benedike, why what is the matter?
That you have such a February face,
So full of frost, of storm, and cloudiness.

I think he thinks upon the savage bull:
Tush, fear not man, we will tip thy horns with gold,
And all Europa shall rejoice at thee,
As once Europa did at lusty Jove,
When he would play the noble beast in love.

Bull Jove sir, had an amiable low,
And some such strange bull leapt your fathers Cow,
A got a Calfe in that same noble seat,
Much like to you, for you have just his b^eat.

For this I owe you: here comes other recknings.
Which is the Lady I must seize upon?

This same is she, and I ^oe give you her.


Why thou she is mine, sweet let me see your face.


No that you shall not, till you take her hand,
Before this Friar, and swear to marry her.

Give me your hand before this holy Friar,
I am your husband if you like of me.

And when I lived I was your other wife,
And when you loved, you were my other husband.

Another Hero?


Nothing certaine^.
One Hero died, but I do live,
And surely as I live, I am a maid.

The former Hero, Hero that is dead.


She died my Lord, but whiles her slander lived.


All this amazement can I qualify,
When after that the holy rites are ended,
I Will tell you largely of fair Heroes death:
Mean time let wonder seem familiar,
And to the chapel let us presently.

Soft and fair Friar, which is Beatrice?


I answer to that name, what is your will?


Do not you love me?


Why no, no more then reason.


Why then your Uncle, and the Prince, and Claudio, have been deceived, they
swore you did


Do not you love me?


Troth no, no more then reason.


Why then my Cousin Margaret and Vrsula
Are much deceived, for they did swear you did.

They swore you were almost sick for me.


They swore you were wel-nye dead for me.


It Is no matter, then you do not love me?


No truly, but in friendly recompense.


Come Cousin, I am sure you love the gentleman.


And I Will be sworn upon it, that he loves her,
For here is a paper written in his hand,
A halting sonnet of his own pure brain,
Fashioned to Beatrice.

And heeres another,
Writ in my cosins hand, stolen from her pocket,
Containing her affection unto Benedicke.

A miracle, here is our own hands against our hearts: come I will have thee,
but by this light I take thee for pity


I would not deny you, but by this good day, I yield upon great persuasion,
and partly to save your life, for I was told, you were in a consumption


Peace I will stop your mouth.


How do thou Benedicke the married man?


I Will tell thee what Prince: a College of witte-crackers cannot flout me out
of my humor, do thou think I care for a Satyr or an Epigram? no, if a man
will be beaten with brains, a shall wear nothing handsome about him: in
brief, since I do purpose to marry, I will think nothing to any purpose that
the world can say against it, and therefore never flout at me, for I have said
against it: for man is a giddy thing, and this is my conclusion: for thy part
Claudio, I did think to have beaten thee, but in that thou art like to be my
kinsman, live vnbruis'd, and love my cousin


I had well hoped you would have denied Beatrice, yt I might have cudgel'd
thee out of thy single life, to make thee a double dealer, which out of
question thou will be, if my Cousin do not look exceeding narrowly to thee


Come, come, we are friends, let us have a dance ere we are married, that we may
lighten our own hearts, and our wives heels


We Will have dancing afterward.


First, of my word, therefore play music. Prince, thou art sad, get, thee a
wife, get thee a wife, there is no staff more reverend then one tipped with
horn


My Lord, your brother John is taken in flight,
And brought with armed men back to Messina.

Think not on him till to morrow, i will devise thee brave punishments for him:
strike up Pipers



