Never tell me, I take it much unkindly
That thou (Iago) who have had my purse,
As if ye strings were thine, should know of this.

But you will not hear me. If ever I did dream
Of such a matter, abhor me.

Thou told'st me,
Thou did hold him in thy hate.

Despise me
If I do not. Three Great-ones of the City,
(In personal suite to make me his Lieutenant)
Off-capt to him: and by the faith of man
I know my price, I am worth no worsse a place.
But he (as loving his own pride, and purposes)
Euades them, with a bumbast Circumstance,
Horribly stufft with Epithites of war,
Non-suites my Mediators. For certes, says he,
I have already chose my Officer. And what was he?
For-sooth, a great Arithmatician,
One Michaell Cassio, a Florentine,
(A Fellow almost damned in a fair Wife)
That never set a Squadron in the Field,
Nor the division of a Battle knows
More then a Spinster. Unless the Bookish Theoricke:
Wherein the Tongued Consuls can propose
As Masterly as he. Mere pratle (without practice)
Is all his Souldiership. But he (Sir) had the election;
And I (of whom his eyes had seen the proof
At Rhodes, at Ciprus, and on others grounds
Christened, and Heathen) must be be-leed, and calmed
By Debtor, and Creditor. This Counter-caster,
He (in good time) must his Lieutenant be,
And I (bless the mark) his Mooreships Ancient.

By heaven, I rather would have bin his hangman.


Why, there is no remedy.
It Is the curse of Service;
Preferment goes by Letter, and affection,
And not by old gradation, where each second
Stood Heir to' the first. Now Sir, be judge your self,
Whether I in any just term am Affin'd
To love the Moore?

I would not follow him then.


O Sir content you.
I follow him, to serve my turn upon him.
We cannot all be Masters, nor all Masters
Cannot be truly followed. You shall mark
Many a dutious and knee-crooking knave;
That (doting on his own obsequious bondage)
Wears out his time, much like his Masters Ass,
For naught but Prouender, and when he is old Casheer'd.
Whip me such honest knaves. Others there are
Who trym'd in Forms, and visages of Duty,
Keep yet their hearts attending on themselves,
And throwing but shows of Service on their Lords
Do well thrive by them.
And when they have lined their Coats
Do themselves Homage.
These Fellows have some soul,
And such a one do I profess my self. For (Sir)
It is as sure as you are Rodorigo,
Were I the Moore, I would not be Iago:
In following him, I follow but my self.
Heaven is my Judge, not I for love and duty,
But seeming so, for my peculiar end:
For when my outward Action does demonstrate
The native act, and figure of my heart
In Complement externe, it is not long after
But I will wear my heart upon my sleeue
For Dawes to pecke at; I am not what I am.

What a fall Fortune does the Thicks-lips owe
If he can carry't thus?

Call up her Father:
Rowse him, make after him, poison his delight,
Proclaim him in the Streets. Incense her kinsmen,
And though he in a fertile Clymate dwell,
Plague him with Flies: though that his Joy be Joy,
Yet throw such chances of vexation on it,
As it may loose some color.

Here is her Fathers house, I Will call aloud.


Do, with like timorous accent, and dire yell,
As when (by Night and Negligence) the Fire
Is spied in populus Cities.

What hoa: Brabantio, Siginor Brabantio, hoa.


Awake: what hoa, Brabantio: Thieves, Thieves.
Look to your house, your daughter, and your Bags,
Thieves, Thieves.

Above. What is the reason of this terrible
Summon^? What is the matter there?

Signior is all your Family within?


Are your Doors locked?


Why? Wherefore ask you this?


Sir, y' are robbed, for shame put on your Gown,
Your heart is burst, you have lost half your soul
Even now, now, very now, an old black Ram
Is tupping your white Ewe. Arise, arise,
Awake the snorting Citizens with the Bell,
Or else the devil will make a Grand-sire of you.
Arise I say.

What, have you lost your wits?


Most reverend Signior, do you know my voice?


Not I: what are you?


My name is Rodorigo.


The worsser welcome:
I have charged thee not to haunt about my doors:
In honest plainness thou have heard me say,
My Daughter is not for thee. And now in madness
(Being full of Supper, and distempring draughtes)
Upon malicious knauerie, do thou come
To start my quiet.

Sir, Sir, Sir.


But thou must needs be sure,
My spirits and my place have in their power
To make this bitter to thee.

Patience good Sir.


What tell thou me of Robbing?
This is Venice: my house is not a Grange.

Most grave Brabantio,
In simple and pure soul, I come to you.

Sir: you are one of those that will not serve God, if the devil bid you.
Because we come to do you service, and you think we are Russians, you will have
your Daughter covered with a Barbary horse, you will have your Nephews neigh to
you, you will have Coursers for Cozens: and Gennets for Germans


What profane wretch art thou?


I am one Sir, that comes to tell you, your Daughter and the Moore, are making
the Beast with two backs


Thou art a Villain.


You are a Senator.


This thou shall answer. I know thee Rodorigo.


Sir, I will answer any thing. But I beseech you
If It be your pleasure, and most wise consent,
(As partly I find it is) that your fair Daughter,
At this odd Even and dull watch of the night
Transported with no worse nor better guard,
But with a knave of common hire, a Gundelier,
To the gross claspes of a Lascivious Moore:
If this be known to you, and your Allowance,
We then have done you bold, and saucie wrongs.
But if you know not this, my Manners tell me,
We have your wrong rebuke. Do not believe
That from the sense of all Civility,
I thus would play and trifle with your Reverence.
Your Daughter (if you have not given her leave)
I say again, has made a gross revolt,
Tying her Duty, Beauty, Wit, and Fortunes
In an extrauagant, and wheeling Stranger,
Of here, and every where: straight satisfy your self.
If she be in her Chamber, or your house,
Let loose on me the Justice of the State
For thus deluding you.

Strike on the Tinder, hoa:
Give me a Taper: call up all my people,
This Accident is not unlike my dream,
Belief of it oppresses me already.
Light, I say, light.

Farewell: for I must leave you.
It seems not meet, nor wholesome to my place
To be producted, (as if I stay, I shall,)
Against the Moore. For I do know the State,
(How ever this may gall him with some check)
Cannot with safety cast-him. For he is embarked
With such loud reason to the Cyprus Wars,
(Which even now stands in Act) that for their souls
Another of his Fadome, they have none,
To lead their Business. In which regard,
Though I do hate him as I do hell apines,
Yet, for necessity of present life,
I must show out a Flag, and sign of Love,
(Which is indeed but sign) that you shall surely find him
Lead to the Sagitary the raised Search:
And there will I be with him. So farewell.

It is too true an evil. Gone she is,
And what is to come of my despised time,
Is naught but bitterness. Now Rodorigo,
Where did thou see her? (Oh unhappy Girl)
With the Moore say thou? (Who would be a Father?)
How did thou know 'twas she? (Oh she deceaues me
Past thought:) what said she to you? Get more Tapers*
Raise all my Kindred. Are they married think you?

Truly I think^ they are.


Oh Hea^n: how got she out?
Oh treason of the blood.
Fathers, from hence trust not your Daughters minds
By what you see them act. Is there not Charms,
By which the property of Youth, and Maidhood
May be abused? Have you not read Rodorigo,
Of some such thing?

Yes Sir: I have indeed.


Call up my Brother: oh would you had had her.
Some one way, some another. Do you know
Where we may apprehend her, and the Moore?

I think I can discover him, if you please
To get good Guard, and go along with me.

Pray you lead on. At every house I Will call,
(I may command at most) get Weapons (hoa)
And raise some special Officers of might:
On good Rodorigo, I will deserve your pains.

Though in the trade of War I have slain men,
Yet do I hold it very stuff of the conscience
To do no contrived Murder: I lack Iniquity
Sometime to do me service. Nine, or ten times
I had thought to have yerk'd him here under the Ribs.

It Is better as it is.


Nay but he prated,
And spoke such scuruy, and provoking terms
Against your Honor, that with the little godliness I have
I did full hard forbear him. But I pray you Sir,
Are you fast married? Be assured of this,
That the Magnifico is much beloved,
And has in his effect a voice potentiall
As double as the Dukes: He will divorce you.
Or put upon you, what restraint or greeuance,
The Law (with all his might, to enforce it on)
Will give him Cable.

Let him do his spite;
My Services, which I have done the Signorie
Shall out-tongue his Complaints. It Is yet to know,
Which when I know, that boasting is an Honor,
I shall promulgate. I fetch my life and being,
From Men of Royal Seige. And my demerites
May speak (vnbonnetted) to as proud a Fortune
As this that I have reached. For know Iago,
But that I love the gentle Desdemona,
I would not my vnhoused free condition
Put into Circumscription, and Confine,
For the Seas worth. But look, what Lights come yond?

Those are the raised Father, and his Friends:
You were best go in.

Not I: I must be found.
My Parts, my Title, and my perfect Soul
Shall manifest me rightly. Is it they?

By Ianus, I think no.


The Servants of the Dukes?
And my Lieutenant?
The goodness of the Night upon you (Friends)
What is the News?

The Duke does greet you (General)
And he requires your haste, Post-haste appearance,
Enen on the instant.

What is the matter, think you?


Something from Cyprus, as I may divine:
It is a business of some heat. The Galleys
Have sent a dozen sequent Messengers
This very night, at one another heels:
And many of the Consuls, raised and met,
Are at the Dukes already. You have bin hotly called for,
When being not at your Lodging to be found,
The Senate has sent about three several Quests,
To search you out.

It Is well I am found by you:
I will but spend a word here in the house,
And go with you.

Aunciant, what makes he here?


Faith, he to night has boarded a Land Carract,
If it prove lawful prize, he' made for ever.

I do not understand.


He Is married.


To who?


Marry to -- Come Captain, will you go?


Have with you.


Here comes another Troop to seek for you.


It is Brabantio: General be advised,
He comes to bad intent.

Holla, stand there.


Signior, it is the Moore.


Down with him, Thief.


You, Rodorigoc? Cme Sir, I am for you.


Keep up your bright Swords, for the dew will rust them. Good Signior, you
shall more command with years, then with your Weapons


Oh thou foul Thief,
Where have thou stowed my Daughter?
Damned as thou art, thou have enchaunted her
For I Will refer me to all things of sense,
(If she in Chains of Magic were not bound)
Whether a Maid, so tender, Fair, and Happy,
So opposite to Marriage, that she shunned
The wealthy curled Deareling of our Nation,
Would ever have (t'encurre a general mock)
Run from her Guard age to the sootie bosom,
Of such a thing as thou: to fear, not to delight?
Judge me the world, if it is not gross in sense,
That thou have practiced on her with foul Charms,
Abused her delicate Youth, with Drugs or Minerals,
That weakens Motion. I Will haue't disputed on,
It Is probable, and palpable to thinking;
I therefore apprehend and do attach thee,
For an abuser of the World, a practiser
Of Arts inhibited, and out of warrant;
Lay hold upon him, if he do resist
Subdue him, at his peril.

Hold your hands
Both you of my inclining, and the rest.
Were it my Cue to fight, I should have known it
Without a Prompter. Whether will you that I go
To answer this your charge?

To Prison, till fit time
Of Law, and course of direct Session
Call thee to answer.

What if do obey?
How may the Duke be therewith satisfied,
Whose Messengers are here about my side,
Upon some present business of the State,
To bring me to him.

It Is true most worthy Signior,
The Dukes in Counsel, and your Noble self,
I am sure is sent for.

How? The Duke in Counsel?
In this time of the night? Bring him away;
Mine Is not an idle Cause. The Duke himself,
Or any of my Brothers of the State,
Cannot but feel this wrong, as 'twere their own:
For if such Actions may have passage free,
Bond-slaues, and Pagans shall our Statesmen be.

There Is no composition in this News,
That gives them Credit.

Indeed, they are disproportioned;
My Letters say, a Hundred and seven Galleys.

And mine a Hundred forty.


And mine two Hundred:
But though they iumpe not on a just account,
(As in these Cases where the aim reports,
It Is often with difference) yet do they all confirm
A Turkish Fleet, and bearing up to Cyprus.

Nay, it is possible enough to judgment:
I do not so secure me in the Error,
But the maine Article I do approve
In fearful sense.

What hoa, what hoa, what hoa.


A Messenger from the Galleys.


Now? What Is the business?


The Turkish Preparation makes for Rhodes,
So was I bid report here to the State,
By Signior Angelo.

How say you by this change?


This cannot be
By no assay of reason. It Is a Pageant
To keep us in false gaze, when we consider
The importancie of Cyprus to the Turk;
And let our selves again but understand,
That as it more concerns the Turk then Rhodes,
So may he, with more facile question bear it,
For that it stands not in such Warrelike brace,
But altogether lackes the abilities
The Rhodes is dressed in. If we make thought of this,
We must not think the Turk is so unskillful,
To leave that latest, which concerns him first,
Neglecting an attempt of ease, and gain
To wake, and wage a danger profitlesse.

Nay, in all confidence he is not for Rhodes.


Here is more News.


The Ottamites, Reueren'd, and Gracious,
Steering with due course toward the I Will of Rhodes,
Have there inioynted them with an after Fleet.

I, so I thought: how many, as you guess?


Of thirty Sail: and now they do re-stem
Their backward course, bearing with frank appearance
Their purposes toward Cyprus. Signior Montano,
Your trusty and most Valiant Seruitour,
With his free duty, recommends you thus,
And prays you to believe him.

It Is certain then for Cyprus:
Marcus Luccicos, is not he in Town?

He Is now in Florence.


Write from us,
To him, Post, Post-haste, dispatch.

Here comes Brabantio, and the Valiant Moore.


Valiant Othello, we must straight employ you,
Against the general Enemy Ottoman.
I did not see you: welcome gentle Signior,
We lack't your Counsel, and your help to night.

So did I yours: Good your Grace pardon me.
Neither my place, hor ought I heard of business
Has raised me from my bed; nor does the general care
Take hold on me. For my particular grief
Is of so flood-gate, and ore-bearing Nature,
That it engluts, and swallows other sorrows,
And it is still it self.

Why? What Is the matter?


My Daughter: oh my Daughter!


Dead?


I, to me.
She is abused, stolen from me, and corrupted
By Spells, and Medicines, bought of Mountebanks;
For Nature, so prepostrously to err,
(Being not deficient, blind, or lame of sense,)
Sans witchcraft could not.

Who ere he be, that in this foul proceeding
Has thus beguiled your Daughter of her self,
And you of her; the bloody Book of Law,
You shall your self read, in the bitter letter,
After your own sense: yea, though our proper Son
Stood in your Action.

Humbly I thank your Grace,
Here is the man; this Moore, whom now it seems
Your special Mandate, for the State affairs
Has hither brought.

We are very sorry for it.


What in your own part, can you say to this?


Nothing, but this is so.


Most Potent, Grave, and Reueren'd Signiors,
My very Noble, and approved good Masters;
That I have taken away this old man's Daughter,
It is most true: true I have married her;
The very head, and front of my offending,
Has this extent; no more. Rude am I, in my speech,
And little blessed with the soft phrase of Peace;
For since these Arms of mine, had seven years pith,
Till now, some nine Moons wasted, they have used
Their dearest action, in the Tented Field:
And little of this great world can I speak,
More then pertaines to Feats of Broiles, and Battle,
And therefore little shall I grace my cause,
In speaking for my self. Yet, (by your gracious patience)
I will a round vn-varnish'd ^ Tale deliver,
Of my whole course of Love.
What Drugges, what Charms,
What Coniuration, and what mighty Magic,
(For such proceeding I am charged withal)
I won his Daughter.

A Maiden, never bold:
Of Spirit so still, and quiet, that her Motion
Blushed at her self, and she, in spite of Nature,
Of Years, of Country, Credit, every thing
To fall in Love, with what she feared to look on;
It is a judgment main'd, and most imperfect.
That will confess Perfection so could err
Against all rules of Nature, and must be driven
To find out practices of cunning hell
Why this should be. I therefore vouch again,
That with some Mixtures, powrefull over the blood,
Or with some Dram, (coniur'd to this effect)
He wtought up on her.
To vouch this, is no proof,
Without more wider, and more over Test
Then these thin habits, and poor likely-hoods
Of modern seeming, do prefer against him.

But Othello, speak,
Did you, by indirect, and forced courses
Subdue, and poison this young Maids affections?
Or came it by request, and such fair question
As soul, to soul affords?

I do beseech you,
Send for the Lady to the Sagitary.
And let her speak of me before her Father;
If you do find me foul, in her report,
The Trust, the Office, I do hold of you,
Not only take away, but let your Sentence
Even fall upon my life.

Fetch Desdemona hither.


Aunciant, conduct them:
You best know the place.
And tell she come, as truly as to heaven,
I do confess the vices of my blood,
So justly to your Grave ears, I Will present
How I did thrive in this fair Ladies love,
And she in mine.

Say it Othello.


Her Father loved me, often invited me:
Still questioned me the Story of my life,
From year to year: the Battle, Sieges, Fortune,
That I have past.
I ran it through, even from my boyish days,
To the very moment that he bad me tell it.
Wherein I spoke of most disastrous chances:
Of moving Accidents by Flood and Field,
Of haire-breadth scapes in the imminent deadly breach;
Of being taken by the Insolent Foe,
And sold to slavery. Of my redemption thence,
And portance in my Trauellours history.
Wherein of Antars vast, and Deserts idle,
Rough Quarries, Rocks, Hills, whose head touch heaven,
It was my hint to speak. Such was my Process,
And of the Canibals that each others eat,
The Antropophague, and men whose heads
Grew beneath their shoulders. These things to hear,
Would Desdemona seriously incline:
But still the house Affairs would draw her hence:
Which ever as she could with haste dispatch,
She'l'd come again, and with a greedy ear
Devour up my discourse. Which I observing,
Took once a pliant hour, and found good means
To draw from her a prayer of earnest heart,
That I would all my Pilgrimage dilate,
Whereof by parcels she had something heard,
But not instinctiuely: I did consent,
And often did beguile her of her tears,
When I did speak of some distressefull stroke
That my youth suffered: My Story being done,
She gave me for my pains a world of kisses:
She swore in faith 'twas strange: 'twas passing strange,
'Twas pitiful: 'twas wondrous pitiful.
She wished she had not heard it, yet she wished
That Heaven had made her such a man. She thanked me,
And bad me, if I had a Friend that loved her,
I should but teach him how to tell my Story,
And that would woo her. Upon this hint I spoke,
She loved me for the dangers I had past,
And I loved her, that she did pity them.
This only is the witchcraft I have used.
Here comes the Lady: Let her witness it.

I think this tale would win my Daughter too,
Good Brabantio, take up this mangled matter at the best:
Men do their broken Weapons rather use,
Then their bare hands.

I pray you hear her speak?
If she confess that she was half the wooer,
Destruction on my head, if my bad blame
Light on the man. Come hither gentle Mistress,
Do you perceive in all this Noble Company,
Where most you owe obedience?

My Noble Father,
I do perceive here a divided duty.
To you I am bound for life, and education:
My life and education both do learn me,
How to respect you. You are the Lord of duty,
I am hitherto your Daughter. But here is my Husband;
And so much duty, as my Mother showed
To you, preferring you before her Father:
So much I challenge, that I may profess
Due to the Moore my Lord.

God be with you: I have done.
Please it your Grace, on to the State Affairs;
I had rather to adopt a Child, then get it.
Come hither Moore;
I here do give thee that with all my heart,
Which but thou have already, with all my heart
I would keep from thee. For your sake (Jewel)
I am glad at soul, I have no other Child;
For thy escape would teach me Tirranie
To hang clogges on them. I have done my Lord.

Let me speak like your self:
And lay a Sentence,
Which as a grise, or step may help these Lovers.
When remedies are past, the griefs are ended
By seeing the worst, which late on hopes depended.
To mourn a Mischief that is past and gone,
Is the next way to draw new mischief on.
What cannot be presern'd, when Fortune takes:
Patience, her Injury a mock'ry makes.
The robbed that smiles, steals something from the Thief,
He robs himself, that spends a bootelesse grief.

So let the Turk of Cyprus us beguile,
We loose it not so long as we can smile:
He bears the Sentence well, that nothing bears,
But the free comfort which from thence he hears.
But he bears both the Sentence, and the sorrow,
That to pay grief, must of poor Patience borrow.
These Sentences, to Sugar, or to Gall,
Being strong on both sides, are Equivocal.
But words are words, I never yet did hear:
That the bruized heart was pierced through the eare^.
I humbly beseech you proceed to the Affairs of State.

The Turk with a most mighty Preparation makes for Cyprus: Othello, the
Fortitude of the place is best known to you. And though we have there a
Substitute of most allowed sufficiency; yet opinion, a more sovereign Mistress
of Effects, throws a more safer voice on you: you must therefore be content to
slubber the gloss of your new Fortunes, with this more stubborn, and
boystrous expedition


The Tirant Custom, most Grave Senators,
Has made the flinty and Steel Coach of War
My thrice-driuen bed of Down. I do agnize
A Natural and prompt Alacartie,
I find in hardness: and do undertake
This present Wars against the Ottamites.
Most humbly therefore bending to your State,
I crave fit disposition for my Wife,
Due reference of Place, and Exhibition,
With such Accommodation and besort
As leuels with her breeding.

Why at her Fathers?


I will not have it so.


Nor I.


Nor would I there recide,
To put my Father in impatient thoughts
By being in his eye. Most Grcaious Duke,
To my unfolding, lend your prosperous ear,
And let me find a Charter in your voice
T'assist my simpleness.

What would you Desdemona?


That I love the Moore, to live with him,
My downright violence, and storm of Fortunes,
May trumpet to the world. My heart's subdued
Even to the very quality of my Lord;
I saw Othello's visage in his mind,
And to his Honors and his valiant parts,
Did I my soul and Fortunes consecrate*
So that (dear Lords) if I be left behind
A Moth of Peace, and he go to the War,
The Rites for why I love him, are bereft me:
And I a heavy interim shall support
By his dear absence. Let me go with him.

Let her have your voice.
Vouch with me Heaven, I therefore beg it not
To please the palate of my Appetite:
Nor to comply with heat the young affects
In my defunct, and proper satisfaction.
But to be free, and bounteous to her mind:
And Heaven defend your good souls, that you think
I will your serious and great business scant
When she is with me. No, when light winged Toys
Of feathered Cupid, seele with wanton dullness
My speculatiue, and offic'd Instrument:
That my Disports corrupt, and taint my business:
Let House-wiues make a Skillet of my Helm,
And all indigne, and base adversities,
Make head against my Estimation.

Be it as you shall privately determine,
Either for her stay, or going: the Affair cries have:
And speed must answer it.

You must away to night.


With all my heart.


At nine in the morning, here we will meet again.
Othello, leave some Officer behind
And he shall our Commission bring to you:
And such things else of quality and respect
As does import you.

So please your Grace, my Ancient,
A man he is of honesty and trust:
To his conueyance I assign my wife,
With what else needful, your good Grace shall think
To be sent after me.

Let it be so:
Good night to every one. And Noble Signior,
If Virtue no delighted Beauty lack,
Your Son-in-law is far more Fair then Black.

Adieu brave Moore, use Desdemona well.


Look to her (Moore) if thou have eyes to see:
She has deceived her Father, and may thee.

My life upon her faith. Honest Iago,
My Desdemona must I leave to thee:
I prithee let thy wife attend on her,
And bring them after in the best advantage.
Come Desdemona, I have but an hour
Of Love, of wordly matter, and direction
To spend with thee. We must obey the the time.

Iago.


What say thou Noble heart?


What will I do, think thou?


Why go to bed and sleep.


I will incontinently drown my self.


If thou do, I shall never love thee after. Why thou silly Gentleman?


It is sillyness to live, when to live is torment: and then have we a
prescription to dye, when death is our Physician


Oh villainous: I have looked upon the world for four times seven years, and
since I could distinguish betwixt a Benefit, and an Injury: I never found man
that knew how to love himself. Ere I would say, I would drown my self for
the love of a Gynney Hen, I would change my Humanity with a Baboone


What should I do? I confess it is my shame to be so fond, but it is not in my
virtue to amend it


Virtue? A fig, it is in our selves that we are thus, or thus. Our Bodies are
our Gardens, to the which, our Wills are Gardiners. So that if we will plant
Nettels, or sow Lettice: Set Hisope, and weed up Time* Supply it with one
gender of Herbs, or distract it with many: either to have it sterrill with
idleness, or manured with Industry, why the power, and Corrigeable authority
of this lies in our Wills. If the brain of our lives had not one Scale of
Reason, to poize another of Sensuality, the blood, and baseness of our
Natures would conduct us to most prepostrous Conclusions. But we have Reason to
cool our raging Motions, our carnal Stings, or vnbitted Lusts: whereof I take
this, that you call Love, to be a Sect, or Seyen


It cannot be.


It is merely a Lust of the blood, and a permission of the will. Come, be a
man: drown thy self? Drown Cats, and blind Puppies. I have professed me thy
Friend, and I confess me knit to thy deserving, with Cables of perdurable
toughness. I could never better steed thee then now. Put Money in thy purse:
follow thou the Wars, defeat thy favor, with an usurped Beard. I say put
Money in thy purse. It cannot be long that Desdemona should continue her love
to the Moore. Put Money in thy purse: nor he his to her. It was a violent
Commencement in her, and thou shall see an answerable Sequestration, put but
Money in thy purse. These Moors are changeable in their wills: fill thy purse
with Money. The Food that to him now is as lushious as Locusts, shall be to him
shortly, as bitter as Coloquintida. She must change for youth: when she is
sated with his body she will find the errors of her choice. Therefore, put
Money in thy purse. If thou will needs damn thy self, do it a more delicate
way then drowning. Make all the Money thou can: If Sanctimonie, and a frail
vow, betwixt an erring Barbarian, and super-subtle Venetian be not too hard for
my wits, and all the Tribe of hell, thou shall enjoy her: therefore make Money:
a pox of drowning thy self, it is clean out of the way. Seek thou rather to
be hanged in Compassing thy joy, then to be drowned, and go without her


Will thou be fast to my hopes, if I depend on the issue?


Thou art sure of me: Go make Money: I have told thee often, and I re-tell thee
again, and again, I hate the Moore. My cause is hearted; thine has no less
reason. Let us be coniunctiue in our revenge, against him. If thou can
Cuckold him, thou do thy self a pleasure, me a sport. There are many Events
in the Womb of Time, which will be delivered. Trauerse, go, provide thy Money.
We will have more of this to morrow. Adieu


Where shall we meet in the morning?


At my Lodging.


I Will be with thee betimes.


Go too, farewell. Do you hear Rodorigo?


I Will sell all my Land.


Thus do I ever make my Fool, my purse:
For I mine own gained knowledge should profane
If I would time expend with such Snpe,
But for my Sport, and Profit: I hate the Moore,
And it is thought abroad, that 'twixt my sheets
She has done my Office. I know not if it be true,
But I, for mere suspicion in that kind,
Will do, as if for Surety. He holds me well,
The better shall my purpose work on him:
Cassio's a proper man: Let me see now,
To get his Place, and to plume up my will
In double Knavery. How? How? Let Us see.
After some time, to abuse Othello's ears,
That he is too familiar with his wife:
He has a person, and a smooth dispose
To be suspected: framed to make women false.
The Moore is of a free, and open Nature,
That thinks men honest, that but seem to be so,
And will as tenderly be lead by' the Nose
As Asses are:
I haue't: it is engendered: Hell, and Night,
Must bring this monstrous Birth, to the worlds light.

What from the Cape, can you discern at Sea?


Nothing at all, it is a high wrought Flood:
I cannot 'twixt the Heaven, and the Maine,
Descry a Sail.

Me thinks, the wind has spoke aloud at Land,
A fuller blast never shook our Battlements:
If it has ruffiand so upon the Sea,
What ribs of Oak, when Mountains melt on them,
Can hold the Morties. What shall we hear of this?

A Segregation of the Turkish Fleet:
For do but stand upon the Foaming Shore,
The chidden Billow seems to pelt the Clouds,
The winde-shak'd-Surge, with high and monstrous Maine
Seems to cast water on the burning Bear,
And quench the Guards of the euer-fixed Pole:
I never did like mollestation view
On the enchafed Flood.

If that the Turkish Fleet
Be not enshelter'd, and embay'd, they are drowned,
It is impossible to bear it out.

News Laddes: our wars are done:
The desperate Tempest has so banged the Turks,
That their designement halts. A Noble ship of Venice,
Has seen a grievous wrack and sufferance
On most part of their Fleet.

How? Is this true?


The Ship is here put in: A Verennessa, Michael Cassio
Lieutenant to the warlike Moore, Othello,
Is come on Shore* the Moore himself at Sea,
And is in full Commission here for Cyprus.

I am glad on it:
It Is a worthy Governor.

But this same Cassio, though he speak of comfort,
Touching the Turkish loss, yet he looks sadly,
And pray the Moore be safe; for they were ^ted
With foul and violent Tempest.

Pray Heavens he be:
For I have served him, and the man commands
Like a full Soldier. Let Us to the Seaside (hoa)
As well to see the Vessel that is come in,
As to throw-out our eyes for brave Othello,
Even till we make the Maine, and the Eriall blew,
An indistinct regard.

Come, let us do so;
For every Minute is expectancie
Of more Arriuancie.

Thanks you, the valiant of the warlike Isle,
That so approve the Moore: Oh let the Heavens
Give him defense against the Elements,
For I have lost him on a dangerous Sea.

Is he well shipped?


His Bark is stoutly Timber'd, and his Pylot
Of very expert, and approved Allowance;
Therefore my hope's (not surfetted to death)
Stand in bold Cure.

A Sail, a Sail, a Sail.


What noise?


The Town is empty; on the brow of the Sea
Stand ranks of People, and they cry, a Sail.

My hopes do shape him for the Governor.


They do discharge their Shot of Courtesy,
Our Friends, at least.

I pray you Sir, go forth,
And give us truth who it is that is arrived.

I shall.


But good Lieutenant, is your General wiu'd?


Most fortunately: he has atchieu'd a Maid
That paragons description, and wild Fame:
One that excels the quirkes of Blazoning pens,
And in the essential Vesture of Creation,
Does tire the Ingeniuer.
How now? Who has put in?

It Is one Iago, Ancient to the General.


Has had most favorable, and happy speed:
Tempests themselves, high Seas, and howling winds,
The gutter'd-Rockes, and Congregated Sands,
Traitors ensteep'd, to enclogge the guiltless Keele,
As having sense of Beauty, do omit
Their mortal Natures, letting go safely by
The Divine Desdemona.

What is she?


She that I spoke of:
Our great Captains Captain,
Left in the conduct of the bold Iago,
Whose footing here anticipates our thoughts,
A Senights speed. Great Jove, Othello guard,
And swell his Sail with thine own powrefull breath,
That he may bless this Bay with his tall Ship,
Make loves quick pants in Desdemonaes Arms,
Give renewed fire to our extincted Spirits.
Oh behold,
The Riches of the Ship is come on shore:
You men of Cyprus, let her have your knees.
Hail to thee Lady: and the grace of Heaven,
Before, behind thee, and on every hand
Enwheele thee round.

I thank you, Valiant Cassio,
What tidings can you tell of my Lord?

He is not yet arrived, nor know I ought
But that he is well, and will be shortly here.

Oh, but I fear:
How lost you company?

The great Contention of Sea, and Skies
Parted our fellowship. But hark, a Sail.

A Sail, a Sail.


They give this greeting to the Cittadell:
This likewise is a Friend.

See for the News:
Good Ancient, you are welcome. Welcome Mistress:
Let it not gaul your patience (good Iago)
That I extend my Manners. It Is my breeding,
That gives me this bold show of Courtesy.

Sir, would she give you so much of her lips,
As of her tongue she often bestows on me,
You would have enough.

Alas: she has no speech.


Infaith too much:
I find it still, when I have leave to sleep.
Marry before your Ladyship, I grant,
She puts het tongue a little in her heart,
And chides with thinking.

You have little cause to say so.


Come on, come on: you are Pictures out of door: Bells in your Parlours:
Wilde-Cats in your Kitchens: Saints in your Injuries: Devils being offended:
Players in your Huswiferie, and Huswiues in your Beds


Oh, fie upon thee, Slanderer.


Nay, it is true: or else I am a Turk,
You rise to play, and go to bed to work.

You shall not write my praise.


No, let me not.


What would write of me, if thou should praise me?


Oh, gentle Lady, do not put me to it,
For I am nothing, if not Critical.

Come on, assay.
There Is one gone to the Harbor?

I Madam.


I am not merry: but I do beguile
The thing I am, by seeming otherwise.
Come, how would thou praise me?

I am about it, but indeed my invention comes from my pate, as Birdlyme does
from Freeze, it pluckes out Brains and all. But my Muse labors, and thus she
is delivered
If she be fair, and wise: fairness, and wit,
The ones for use, the other uses it.

Well praised:
How if she be Black and Witty?

If she be black, and thereto have a wit,
She Will find a white, that shall her blackness fit.

Worse, and worse.


How if Fair, and Foolish?


She never yet was foolish that was fair,
For even her folly helped her to an heir.

These are old fond Paradoxes, to make Fools laugh in the Alehouse. What
miserable praise have thou for her that is Foul, and Foolish


There Is none so foul and foolish thereunto,
But does foul pranks, which fair, and wise-ones do.

Oh heavy ignorance: thou praisest the worst best. But what praise could
thou bestow on a deserving woman indeed? One, that in the authorithy of her
merit, did justly put on the vouch of very malice it self


She that was ever fair, and never proud,
Had Tongue at will, and yet was never loud:
Never lackt Gold, and yet went never gay,
Fled from her wish, and yet said now I may.
She that being angered, her revenge being nie,
Bad her wrong stay, and her displeasure fly:
She that in wisdom never was so frail,
To change the Cods-head for the Salmons tail:
She that could think, and neu'r disclose her mind,
See Suitors following, and not look behind:
She was a wight, (if ever such wightes were)

To do what?


To suckle Fools, and chronicle small Beer.


Oh most lame and impotent conclusion. Do not learn of him Aemillia, though he
be thy husband. How say you (Cassio) is he not a most profane, and liberal
Counsailor


He speaks home (Madam) you may relish him more in the Soldier, then in the
Scholar


He takes her by the palm: I, well said, whisper. With as little a web as
this, will I ensnare as great a Fly as Cassio. I smile upon her, do: I will
give thee in thine own Courtship. You say true, it is so indeed. If such tricks
as these strip you out of your Lieutenantrie, it had been better you had not
kissed your three fingers so often, which now again you are most apt to play the
Sir, in. Very good: well kissed, and excellent Curtsie: it is so indeed. Yet
again, your fingers to your lips? Would they were Cluster-pipes for your
sake

The Moore I know his Trumpet.


It Is truly so.


Let Us meet him, and recieue him.


Lo, where he comes.


O, my fair Warrior.


My dear Othello.


It gives me wonder great, as my content
To see you here before me.
Oh my Souls Joy:
If after every Tempest, come such Calmes,
May the winds blow, till they have wakened death:
And let the laboring Bark climb hills of Seas
Olympus high: and duck again as low.
As hell's from Heaven. If it were now to dye,
'Twere now to be most happy. For I fear,
My Soul has her content so absolute,
That not another comfort like to this,
Succeedes in unknown Fate.

The Heauen's forbid
But that our Loves
And Comforts should increase
Even as our days do grow.

Amen to rhat (sweet Powers)
I cannot speak enough of this content,
It stoppes me here: it is too much of joy.
And this, and this the greatest discords be
That ere our hearts shall make.

Oh you are well tuned now: But I Will set down the peggs that make this Music,
as honest as I am


Come: let us to the Castle.
News (Friends) our Wars are done:
The Turks are drowned.
How does my old Acquaintance of this Isle?
(Honey) you shall be well desired in Cyprus,
I have round great love among'st them. Oh my Sweet,
I prattle out of fashion, and I do ate
In mine own comforts. I prithee, good Iago,
Go to the Bay, and disimbarke my Coffers:
Bring thou the Master to the Cittadell,
He is a good one, and his worthynesse
Does challenge much respect. Come Desdemona,
Once more well met at Cyprus.

Do thou meet me presently at the Harbor. Come thither, if thou be'st Valiant,
(as they say base men being in Love, have then a Nobility in their Natures,
more then is native to them) lift-me; the Lieutenant to night watches on the
Court of Guard. First, I must tell thee this: Desdemona, is directly in love
with him


With him? Why, it is not possible.


Lay thy finger thus: and let thy soul be instructed. Mark me with what
violence she first loved the Moore, but for bragging, and telling her
fantastical lies. To love him still for prating, let not thy discreet heart
think it. Her eye must be fed. And what delight shall she have to look on the
devil? When the Blood is made dull with the Act of Sport, there should be a
game to inflame it, and to give Satiety a fresh appetite. Loveliness in
favor, simpathy in years, Manners, and Beauties: all which the Moore is
defective in. Now for want of these required Conueniences, her delicate
tenderness will find it self abused, begin to heave the, gorge, disrellish
and abhor the Moore, very Nature will instruct her in it, and compel her to
some second choice. Now Sir, this granted (as it is a most pregnant and
vnforc'd position) who stands so eminent in the degree of this Forune, as
Cassio does: a knave very voluble: no further conscionable, then in putting on
the mere form of Civil, and Human seeming, for the better compass of his
salt, and most hidden loose Affection? Why none, why none: A slipper, and
subtle knave, a finder of occasion: that he is an eye can stamp, and
counterfeit Advantages, though true Advantage never present it self. A
devilish knave: besides, the knave is handsome, young: and has all those
requisites in him, that folly and green minds look after. A pestilent
complete knave, and the woman has found him already


I cannot believe that in her, she is full of most blessed condition.


Blessed figges-end. The Wine she drinks is made of grapes. If she had been
blessed, she would never have loved the Moore: Blessed pudding. Did thou not
see her paddle with the palm of his hand? Did not mark that


Yes, that I did: but that was but courtesy.


Leacherie by this hand: an Index, and obscure prologue to the History of Lust
and foul Thoughts. They met so near with their lips, that their breathes
embraced together. Villainous thoughts Rodorigo, when these mutabilities so
marshall the way, hard at hand comes the Master, and maine exercise, the
incorporate conclusion: Pish. But Sir, be you ruled by me. I have brought you
from Venice. Watch you to night: for the Command, I Will lay't upon you. Cassio
knows you not: I Will not be far from you. Do you find some occasion to anger
Cassio, either by speaking too loud, or tainting his discipline, or from what
other course you please, which the time shall more favorably minister


Well.


Sir, he is rash, and very sudden in Choler: and happily may strike at you,
provoke him that he may: for even out of that will I cause these of Cyprus to
Mutiny. Whose qualification shall come into no true taste again, but by the
displan^ng of Cassio. So shall you have a shorter journey to your desires, by
the means I shall then have to prefer them. And the impediment most
profitably removed, without the which there were no expectation of our
prosperity


I will do this, if you can bring it to any opportunity.


I warrant thee. Meet me by and by at the Cittadell. I must fetch his
Necessaries a Shore. Farewell


Adieu.


That Cassio loves her, I do well beleeu't:
That she loves him, it is apt, and of great Credit.
The Moore (how beit that I endure him not)
Is of a constant, loving Noble Nature,
And I dare think, he will prove to Desdemona
A most dear husband. Now I do love her too,
Not out of absolute Lust, (though peradventure
I stand accomptant for as great a sin)
But partly led to diet my Revenge,
For that I do suspect the lusty Moore
Has leaped into my Seat. The thought whereof,
Does (like a poisonous Mineral) gnaw my Inwardes:
And nothing can, or shall content my Soul
Till I am eeuen'd with him, wife, for wift.
Or failing so, yet that I put the Moore,
At least into a Ielouzie so strong
That judgment cannot cure. Which thing to do,
If this poor Trash of Venice, whom I trace
For his quick hunting, stand the putting on,
I Will have our Michael Cassio on the hip,
Abuse him to the Moore, in the right garb
(For I fear Cassio with my Night-Cape too)
Make the Moore thank me, love me, and reward me,
For making him egregiously an Ass,
And practicing upon his peace, and quiet,
Even to madness. It Is here: but yet confused,
Knaueries plain face, is never seen, till used.

It is Othello's pleasure, our Noble and Valiant General. That upon certain
tidings now arrived, importing the mere perdition of the Turkish Fleet: every
man put himself into Triumph. Some to dance, some to make Bonfires, each man,
to what Sport and Revels his addition leads him. For besides these beneficial
News, it is the Celebration of his Nuptial. So much was his pleasure should
be proclaimed. All offices are open, and there is full liberty of Feasting
from this present hour of five, till the Bell have told eleven. Bless the
Isle of Cyprus, and our Noble General Othello


Good Michael, look you to the guard to night.
Let Us teach our selves that Honorable stop,
Not to out-sport discretion.

Iago, has direction what to do.
But notwithstanding with my personal eye
Will I look to it.

Iago, is most honest:
Michael, goodnight. To morrow with your earliest,
Let me have speech with you. Come my dear Love,
The purchase made, the fruits are to ensue,
That profit's yet to come 'tweene me, and you.
Goodnight.

Welcome Iago: we must to the Watch.


Not this hour Lieutenant: it is not yet ten of the clock. Our General cast
us thus early for the love of his Desdemona: Who, let us not therefore blame;
he has not yet made wanton the night with her: and she is sport for Jove


She Is a most exquisite Lady.


And I Will warrant her, full of Game.


Indeed shes a most fresh and delicate creature.


What an eye she has?
Methinkes it sounds a parley to provocation.

An inuiting eye:
And yet me thinks right modest.

And when she speaks,
Is it not an Alarm to Love?

She is indeed perfection.


Well: happiness to their Sheets. Come Lieutenant, I have a stope of Wine,
and here without are a brace of Cyprus Gallants, that would feign have a
measure to the health of black Othello


Not to night, good Iago, I have very poor, and unhappy Brains for drinking.
I could well wish Courtesy would invent some other Custom of entertainment


Oh, they are our Friends: but one Cup, I Will drink for you.


I have drunk but one Cup to night, and that was craftily qualified too: and
behold what inouation it makes here. I am unfortunate in the infirmity, and
dare not task my weakness with any more


What man? It Is a night of Revels, the Gallants desire it.


Where are they?


Here, at the door: I pray you call them in.


I Will do it, but it dislikes me.


If I can fasten but one Cup upon him
With that which he has drunk to night already,
He Will be as full of Quarrel, and offense
As my young Mistress dog.
Now my sick Fool Rodorigo,
Whom Love has turned almost the wrong side out,
To Desdemona has to night Carrows'd.
Potations, pottle-deepe; and he is to watch.
Three else of Cyprus, Noble swelling Spirits,
(That hold their Honors in a wary distance,
The very Elements of this Warrelike Isle)
Have I to night fluster'd with flowing Cups,
And they Watch too.
Now amongst this Flock of drunkards
Am I put to our Cassio in some Action
That may offend the Isle. But here they come.
If Consequence do but approve my dream,
My Boat sails freely, both with wind and Stream.

Before heaven, they have given me a rowse already.


Good-faith a little one: not past a pint, as I am a Soldier.


Some Wine hoa.
And let me the Cannakin clinke, clinke:
And let me the Cannakin clinke.
A Soldiers a man: Oh, man's life's but a span,
Why then let a Soldier drink.
Some Wine Boys.

Before Heaven: an excellent Song.


I learned it in England: where indeed they are most potent in Potting. Your
Dane, your German, and your swag-belly'd Hollander, (drink hoa) are nothing
to your English


Is your Englishmen so exquisite in his drinking?


Why, he drinks you with facillitie, your Dane dead drunk. He sweates not to
overthrow your Almaine. He gives your Hollander a vomit, ere the next Pottle
can be filled


To the health of our General.


I am for it Lieutenant: and I Will do you Justice.


Oh sweet England.
King Stephen was and-a worthy Peer,
His Breeches cost him but a Crown,
He held them Six pence all to dear,
With that he called the Tailor Lowne:
He was a wight of high Renown,
And thou art but of low degree:
It Is Pride that pulls the Country down,
And take thy awl'd Cloak about thee.
Some Wine hoa.

Why this is a more exquisite Song then the other.


Will you heare't again?


No: for I hold him to be unworthy of his Place, that does those things. Well:
heavens above all: and there be souls must be saved, and there be souls must
not be saved


It Is true, good Lieutenant.


For mine own part, no offense to the General, nor any man of quality: I
hope to be saved


And so do I too Lieutenant.


I: (but by your leave) not before me. The Lieutenant is to be saved before the
Ancient. Let Us have no more of this: let us to our Affairs. Forgive us our
sins: Gentlemen let us look to our business. Do not think Gentlemen, I am
drunk: this is my Ancient, this is my right hand, and this is my left. I am
not drunk now: I can stand well enough, and I speak well enough


Excellent well.


Why very well then: you must not think then, that I am drunk.


To the Platform (Masters) come, let us set the Watch.


You see this Fellow, that is gone before,
He Is a Soldier, fit to stand by Caesar,
And give direction. And do but see his vice,
It Is to his virtue, a just Equinox,
The one as long as the other. It Is pity of him:
I fear the trust Othello puts him in,
On some odd time of his infirmity
Will shake this Island.

But is he often thus?


It Is evermore his prologue to his sleep,
He Will watch the Horologe a double Set,
If Drink rock not his Cradle.

It were well
The General were put in mind of it:
Perhaps he sees it not, or his good nature
Prizes the virtue that appears in Cassio,
And looks not on his evils: is not this true?

How now Rodorigo?
I pray you after the Lieutenant, go.

And it is great pity, that the Noble Moore
Should hazard such a Place, as his own Second
With one of an ingraft Infirmity,
It were an honest Action, to say so
To the Moore.

Not I, for this fair Island,
I do love Cassio well: and would do much
To cure him of this evil, But hark, what noise?

You Rogue: you Rascal.


What Is the matter Lieutenant?


A Knave teach me my duty? I Will beat the
Knave into a Twiggen-Bottle.

Beat me?


Do thou prate, Rogue?


Nay, good Lieutenant:
I pray you Sir, hold your hand.

Let me go (Sir)
Or I Will knock you over the Mazard.

Come, come: you're drunk.


Drunk?


Away I say: go out and cry a Mutiny.
Nay good Lieutenant. Alas Gentlemen:
Help hoa. Lieutenant. Sir Montano:
Help Masters. Here Is a goodly Watch indeed.
Who Is that which rings the Bell: Diablo, hoa:
The Town will rise. Fie, fie Lieutenant,
You Will be ashamed for ever.

What is the matter here?


I bleed still, I am hurt to the death. He dies.


Hold for your lives.


Hold hoa: Lieutenant, Sir Montano, Gentlemen:
Have you forgot all place of sense and duty?
Hold. The General speaks to you: hold for shame.

Why how now hoa? From whence arises this?
Are we turned Turks? and to our selves do that
Which Heaven has forbid the Ottamittes.
For Christian shame, put by this barbarous Brawle:
He that stirs next, to carue for his own rage,
Holds his soul light: He dies upon his Motion.
Silence that dreadful Bell, it frights the Isle,
From her propriety. What is the matter, Masters?
Honest Iago that looks dead with greeuing,
Speak: who began this? On thy love I charge thee?

I do not know: Friends all, but now, even now.
In Quarter, and in terms like Bride, and Groom
Deuesting them for Bed: and then, but now:
(As if some Planet had vnwitted men)
Swords out, and tilting one at others breasts,
In opposition bloody. I cannot speak
Any beginning to this peevish odds.
And would, in Action glorious, I had lost
Those legs, that brought me to a part of it.

How comes it (Michaell) you are thus forgot?


I pray you pardon me, I cannot speak.


Worthy Montano, you were wont to be civil:
The gravity, and stillnesse of your youth
The world has noted. And your name is great
In mouths of wisest Censure. What Is the matter
That you unlace your reputation thus,
And spend your rich opinion, for the name
Of a night-brawler? Give me answer to it.

Worthy Othello, I am hurt to danger,
Your Officer Iago, can inform you,
While I spare speech which something now offends me.
Of all that I do know, nor know I ought
By me, that is said, or done amiss this night,
Unless selfe-charitie be sometimes a vice,
And to defend our selves, it be a sin
When violence assailes us.

Now by Heaven,
My blood begins my safer Guides to rule,
And passion (having my best judgment collied)
Assaies to lead the way. If I once stir,
Or do but lift this Arm, the best of you
Shall sink in my rebuke. Give me to know
How this foul Rout began: Who set it on,
And he that is approved in this offense,
Though he had twinn'd with me, both at a birth,
Shall loose me. What in a Town of war,
Yet wild, the peoples hearts brim-full of fear,
To Manage private, and domesticke Quarrel?
In night, and on the Court and Guard of safety?
It Is monstrous: Iago, who began't?

If partially Affin'd, or league in office,
Thou do deliver more, or less then Truth.
Thou art no Soldier.

Touch me not so near,
I had rather have this tongue cut from my mouth,
Then it should do offense to Michaell Cassio.
Yet I persuade my self, to speak the truth
Shall nothing wrong him. This it is General:
Montano and my self being in speech,
There comes a Fellow crying out for help,
And Cassio following him with determined Sword
To execute upon him. Sir, this Gentleman,
Steps in to Cassio, and entreats his pause:
My self, the crying Fellow did pursue,
Least by his clamor (as it so fell out)
The Town might fall in fright. He, (swift of foot)
Out-ran my purpose: and I returned then rather
For that I heard the clinke* and fall of Swords,
And Cassio high in oath: Which till to night
I nere might say before. When I came back
(For this was brief) I found them close together
At blow, and thrust, even as again they were
When you your self did part them.
More of this matter cannot I report.
But Men are Men: The best sometimes forget,
Though Cassio did some little wrong to him,
As men in rage strike those that wish them best,
Yet surely Cassio. I believe received
From him that fled, some strange Indignity,
Which patience could not pass.

I know Iago
Thy honesty, and love does mince this matter,
Making it light to Cassio: Cassio, I love thee,
But never more be Officer of mine.
Look if my gentle Love be not raised up:
I Will make thee an example.

What is the matter (Dear?)


All Is well, Sweeting:
Come away to bed. Sir for your hurts,
My self will be your Surgeon. Lead him off:
Iago, look with care about the Town,
And silence those whom this vil'd brawle distracted.
Come Desdemona, it is the Soldiers life,
To have their Balmy slumbers waked with strife.

What are you hurt Lieutenant?


I, past all Surgery.


Marry Heaven forbid.


Reputation, Reputation, Reputation: Oh I have lost my Reputation. I have lost
the immortal part of myself, and what remains is bestiall. My Reputation,
Iago, my Reputation


As I am an honest man I had thought you had received some bodily wound; there
is more sense in that then in Reputation. Reputation is an idle, and most false
imposition; often got without merit, and lost without deserving. You have lost no
Reputation at all, unless you repute your self such a looser. What man, there
are more ways to recover the General again. You are but now cast in his
mood, (a punishment more in policy, then in malice) even so as one would
beat his offencelesse dog, to affright an Imperious Lion. Sue to him again,
and he is yours


I will rather sue to be despised, then to deceive so good a Commander, with so
slight, so drunken, and so indiscreet an Officer. Drunk? And speak Parrat?
And squabble? Swagger? Swear? And discourse Fustian with ones own shadow? Oh
thou invisible spirit of Wine, if thou have no name to be known by, let us
call thee Devil


What was he that you followed with your Sword? What had he done to you?


I know not.


Is It possible?


I remember a mass of things, but nothing distinctly: a Quarrel, but nothing
wherefore. Oh, that men should put an Enemy in their mouths, to steal away
their Brains? that we should with joy, pleasance, revel and applause,
transform our selves into Beasts


Why? But you are now well enough: how came you thus recovered?


It has pleased the devil drunkenness, to give place to the devil wrath,
one vnpe^fectnesse, shows me another to make me frankly despise my self


Come, you are too seuere^ a Moraller. As the Time, the Place, and the
Condition of this Country stands I could heartily wish this had not befalne: but
since it is, as it is, mend it for your own good


I will ask him for my Place again, he shall tell me, I am a drunkard: had I
as many mouths as Hydra, such an answer would stop them all. To be now a
sensible man, by and by a Fool, an^ presently a Beast. Oh strange! Every
inordinate cup is vnbless'd, and the Ingredient is a devil


Come, come: good wine, is a good famillar Creature, if it be well used:
exclaim no more against it. And good Lieutenant, I think, you think I love
you


I have well approved it, Sir. I drunk?


You, or any man living, may be drunk at a time man. I tell you what you shall
do: Our General's Wife, is now the General. I may say so, in this respect, for
that he has devoted, and given up himself to the Contemplation, mark: and
deuotement of her parts and Graces. Confess your self freely to her:
Importune her help to put you in your place again. She is of so free, so
kind, so apt, so blessed a disposition, she holds it a vice in her goodness,
not to do more then she is requested. This broken joint between you, and her
husband, entreat her to splinter. And my Fortunes against any lay worth naming,
this crack of your Love, shall grow stronger, then it was before


You advise me well.


I protest in the sincerity of Love, and honest kindness.


I think it freely: and betimes in the morning, I will beseech the virtuous
Desdemona to undertake for me: I am desperate of my Fortunes if they check me


You are in the right: good night Lieutenant, I must to the Watch.


Good night, honest Iago.


And what is he then,
That says I play the Villain?
When this advise is free I give, and honest,
Proball to thinking, and indeed the course
To win the Moore again.
For it is most easy
The inclyning Desdemona to subdue
In any honest Suite. She Is framed as fruitful
As the free Elements. And then for her
To win the Moore, were to renownce his Baptism,
All Seals, and Simbols of redeemed sin:
His Soul is so enfetter'd to her Love,
That she may make, unmake, do what she list,
Even as her Appetite shall play the God,
With his weak Function. How am I then a Villain,
To Counsel Cassio to this parallel course,
Directly to his good? Divinity of hell,
When devils will the blackest sins put on,
They do suggest at first with heavenly shows,
As I do now. For whiles this honest Fool
Plies Desdemona, to repair his Fortune,
And she for him, pleades strongly to the Moore,
I Will power this pestilence into his ear:
That she repeales him, for her bodies Lust.
And by how much she strives to do him good,
She shall undo her Credit with the Moore.
So will I turn her virtue into pitch,
And out of her own goodness make the Net,
That shall en-mash them all.
How now Rodorigo?

I do follow here in the Chase, not like a Hound that hunts, but one that
filles up the Cry. My Money is almost spent; I have bin to night exceedingly
well Cudgelled: And I think the issue will be, I shall have so much
experience for my pains; And so, with no money at all, and a little more Wit,
return again to Venice


How poor are they that have not Patience?
What wound did ever heal but by degrees?
Thou know we work by Wit, and not by Witchcraft
And Wit depends on dilatory time:
Dos't not go well? Cassio has beaten thee,
And thou by that small hurt has casheer'd Cassio:
Though other things grow fair against the Sun,
Yet Fruits that blossom first, will first be ripe:
Content thy self, awhile. In Troth it is Morning;
Pleasure, and Action, make the hours seem short.
Retire thee, go where thou art Billited:
A way, I say, thou shall know more hereafter:
Nay get thee gone.
Two things are to be done:
My Wife must move for Cassio to her Mistress:
I Will set her on my self, a while, to draw the Moor apart,
And bring him iumpe, when he may Cassio find
Soliciting his wife: I, that is the way:
Dull not Device, by coldness, and delay.

Masters, play here, I will content your pains,
Something that is brief: and bid, goodmorrow General.

Why Masters, have your Instruments bin in Naples, that they speak in the Nose
thus


How Sir? how?


Are these I pray you, wind Instruments?


I marry are they sir.


Oh, thereby hangs a tale.


Whereby hangs a tale, sir?


Marry sir, by many a wind Instrument that I know. But Masters, here is money
for you: and the General so likes your Music, that he desires you for loves
sake to make no more noise with it


Well Sir, we will not.


If you have any Music that may not be heard, to it again. But (as they say)
to hear Music, the General does not greatly care


We have none such, sir.


Then put up your Pipes in your bag, for I Will away. Go, vanish into air, away.


Do thou hear me, mine honest Friend?


No, I hear not your honest Friend:
I hear you.

Prithee keep up thy Quillets, there is a poor piece of Gold for thee: if the
Gentlewoman that attends the General be stirring, tell her, there is one Cassio
entreats her a little favor of Speech. Will thou do this


She is stirring sir: if she will stir hither, I shall seem to notify unto
her


In happy time, Iago.

You have not bin a-bed then?


Why no: the day had broke before we parted.
I have made bold (Iago) to send in to your wife:
My suite to her is, that she will to virtuous Desdemona
Procure me some access.

I Will send her to you presently:
And I Will devise a mean to draw the Moore
Out of the way, that your converse and business
May be more free.

I humbly thank you for it. I never knew
A Flo^ntine more kind, and honest.

Goodmorrow (good Lieutenant) I am sorry
For your displeasure: but all will sure be well.
The General and his wife are talking of it,
And she speaks for you stoutly. The Moore replies,
That he you hurt is of great Fame in Cyprus,
And great Affinity: and that in wholesome Wisdom
He might not but refuse you. But he protests he loves you
And needs no other Suitor, but his likings
To bring you in again.

Yet I beseech you,
If you think fit, or that it may be done,
Give me advantage of some brief Discourse
With Desdemon alone.

Pray you come in:
I will bestow you where you shall have time
To speak your bosom freely.

I am much bound to you.


These Letters give (Iago) to the Pylot,
And by him do my duties to the Senate:
That done, I will be walking on the Works,
Repair there to me.

Well, my good Lord, I Will do it.


This Fortification (Gentlemen) shall we see it?


Well wait upon your Lordship.


Be thou assured (good Cassio) I will do
All my abilities in thy behalf.

Good Madam do:
I warrant it greeues my Husband,
As if the cause were his.

Oh that is an honest Fellow, Do not doubt Cassio
But I will have my Lord, and you again
As friendly as you were.

Bounteous Madam,
What ever shall become of Michael Cassio,
He Is never any thing but your true Servant.

I know it: I thank you: you do love my Lord:
You have known him long, and be you well assured
He shall in strangeness stand no farther off,
Then in a politic distance.

I, but Lady,
That policy may either last so long,
Or feed upon such nice and waterish diet,
Or breed it self so out of Circumstances,
That I being absent, and my place supplied,
My General will forget my Love, and Service.

Do not doubt that: before Aemilia here,
I give thee warrant of thy place. Assure thee,
If I do vow a friendship, I Will perform it
To the last Article. My Lord shall never rest,
I Will watch him tame, and talk him out of patience;
His Bed shall seem a School, his Board a Shrift,
I Will intermingle every thing he does
With Cassio's suite: Therefore be merry Cassio,
For thy Solicitor shall rather dye,
Then give thy cause away.

Madam, here comes my Lord.


Madam, I Will take my leave.


Why stay, and hear me speak.


Madam, not now: I am very ill at ease,
Unfit for mine own purposes.

Well, do your discretion.


Hah? I like not that,


What do thou say?


Nothing my Lord; or if -- I know not what.


Was not that Cassio parted from my wife?


Cassio my Lord? No sure, I cannot think it
That he would steal away so guilty-like,
Seeing your coming.

I do believe 'twas he.


How now my Lord?
I have bin talking with a Suitor here,
A man that languishes in your displeasure.

Who is it you mean?


Why your Lieutenant Cassio: Good my Lord,
If I have any grace, or power to move you,
His present reconciliation take.
For if he be not one, that truly loves you,
That erres in Ignorance, and not in Cunning,
I have no judgment in an honest face.
I prithee call him back.

Went he hence now?


I sooth; so humbled,
That he has left part of his grief with me
To suffer with him. Good Love, call him back.

Not now (sweet Desdemon) some other time.


But shall't be shortly?


The sooner (Sweet) for you.


Shall't be to night, at Supper?


No, not to night.


To morrow Dinner then?


I shall not dine at home:
I meet the Captains at the Cittadell.

Why then to morrow night, on Tuesday morn,
On Tuesday noone, or night; on Wensday Morn.
I prithee name the time, but let it not
Exceed three days. Infaith he is penitent:
And yet his Trespass, in our common reason
(Save that they say the wars must make example)
Out of her best, is not almost a fault
TO encurre a private check. When shall he come?
Tell me Othello. I wonder in my Soul
What you would ask me, that I should deny.
Or stand so mam'ring on? What? Michael Cassio,
That came a woing wirh you? and so many a time
(When I have spoke of you dispraisingly)
Has taken your part, to have so much to do
To bring him in? Trust me, I could do much.

Prithee no more: Let him come when he will:
I will deny thee nothing.

Why, this is not a Boon:
It Is as I should entreat you wear your Gloves,
Or feed on nourishing dishes, or keep you warm,
Or sue to you, to do a peculiar profit
To your own person. Nay, when I have a suite
Wherein I mean to touch your Love indeed,
It shall be full of poize, and difficult weight,
And fearful to be granted.

I will deny thee nothing.
Whereon, I do beseech thee, grant me this,
To leave me but a little to my self.

Shall I deny you? No: farewell my Lord.


Farewell my Desdemona, I Will come to thee strait.


Aemilia come; be as your Fancies teach you:
What ere you be, I am obedient.

Excellent wretch: Perdition catch my Soul
But I do love thee: and when I love thee not,
Chaos is come again.

My Noble Lord.


What do thou say, Iago?


Did Michael Cassio
When he wooed my Lady, know of your love?

He did, from first to last:
Why do thou ask?

But for a satisfaction of my Thought,
No further harm.

Why of thy thought, Iago?


I did not think he had bin acquainted with her.


O yes, and went between us very often.


Indeed?


Indeed? I indeed. Discern'st thou ought in that?
Is he not honest?

Honest, my Lord?


Honest? I, Honest.


My Lord, for ought I know.


What do thou think?


Think, my Lord?


Think, my Lord? Alas, thou ecchos't me;
As if there were some Monster in thy thought
Too hideous to be shown. Thou do mean something:
I heard thee say even now, thou like not that,
When Cassio left my wife. What didd'st not like?
And when I told thee, he was of my Counsel,
Of my whole course of wooing; thou cried'st, Indeed?
And didd'st contract, and purse thy brow together,
As if thou then hadd'st shut up in thy Brain
Some horrible Conceit. If thou do love me,
Show me thy thought.

My Lord, you know I love you.


I think thou do:
And for I know you are full of Love, and Honesty,
And weigh'st thy words before thou give them breath,
Therefore these stops of thine, fright me the more:
For such things in a false disloyal Knave
Are tricks of Custom: but in a man that is just,
They Are close dilations, working from the heart,
That Passion cannot rule.

For Michael Cassio,
I dare be sworn, I think that he is honest.

I think so too.


Men should be what they seem,
Or those that be not, would they might seem none.

Certain, men should be what they seem.


Why then I think Cassio's an honest man.


Nay, yet there is more in this?
I prithee speak to me, as to thy thinkings,
As thou do ruminate, and give thy worst of thoughts
The worst of words.

Good my Lord pardon me,
Though I am bound to every Act of duty,
I am not bound to that: All Slaves are free:
Utter my Thoughts? Why say, they are vild, and falce?
As where is that Palace, whereinto foul things
Sometimes intrude not? Who has that breast so pure,
Wherein uncleanly Apprehensions
Keep Leetes, and Law-dayes, and in Sessions sit
With meditations lawful?

Thou do conspire against thy Friend (Iago)
If thou but think him wronged, and make his ear
A stranger to thy Thoughts.

I do beseech you,
Though I perchance am vicious in my guess
(As I confess it is my Natures plague
To spy into Abuses, and of my jealousy
Shapes faults that are not) that your wisdom
From one, that so imperfectly conceits,
Would take no notice, nor build your self a trouble
Out of his scattering, and unsure observance:
It were not for your quiet, nor your good,
Nor for my Manhood, Honesty, and Wisdom,
To let you know my thoughts.

What do thou mean?


Good name in Man, and woman (dear my Lord)
Is the immediate Jewel of their Souls;
Who steals my purse, steals trash:
It Is something, nothing;
'Twas mine, it is his, and has bin slave to thousands:
But he that filches from me my good Name,
Robs me of that, which not enriches him,
And makes me poor indeed.

I Will know thy Thoughts.


You cannot, if my heart were in your hand,
Nor shall not, whilst it is in my custody.

Ha?


Oh, beware my Lord, of jealousy,
It is the greene-ey'd Monster, which does mock
The meat it feeds on. That Cuckold lives in bliss,
Who certain of his Fate, loves not his wronger:
But oh, what damned minutes ^els he ore,
Who dotes, yet doubts: Suspects, yet soundly loves?

O misery.


Poor, and Content, is rich, and rich enough,
But Riches finelesse, is as poor as Winter,
To him that ever fears he shall be poor:
Good Heaven, the Souls of all my Tribe defend
From Jealousy.

Why? why is this?
Think thou, I Would make a Life of Jealousy;
To follow still the changes of the Moon
With fresh suspicions? No: to be once in doubt,
Is to be resolved: Exchange me for a Goat,
When I shall turn the business of my Soul
To such exufflicate, and blowed Surmises,
Matching thy inference. It Is not to make me Iealious,
To say my wife is fair, feeds well, loves company,
Is free of Speech, Sings, Plays, and Dances:
Where Virtue is, these are more virtuous.
Nor from mine own weak merits, will I draw
The smallest fear, or doubt of her revolt,
For she had eyes, and chose me. No Iago,
I Will see before I doubt; when I doubt, prove;
And on the proof, there is no more but this,
Away at once with Love, or Jealousy.

I am glad of this: For now I shall have reason
To show the Love and Duty that I bear you
With franker spirit. Therefore (as I am bound)
Receive it from me. I speak not yet of proof:
Look to your wife, observe her well with Cassio,
Wear your eyes, thus: not Iealious, nor Secure:
I would not have your free, and Noble Nature,
Out of selfe-Bounty, be abused: Look to it:
I know our Country disposition well:
In Venice, they do let Heaven see the prankes
They dare not show their Husbands.
Their best Conscience,
Is not to leaue't undone, but kept unknown.

Do thou say so?


She did deceive her Father, marrying you,
And when she seemed to shake, and fear your looks,
She loved them most.

And so she did.


Why go too then:
She that so young could give out such a Seeming
To seele her Fathers eyes up, close as Oak,
He thought 'twas Witchcraft.
But I am much too blame:
I humbly do beseech you of your pardon
For too much loving you.

I am bound to thee for ever.


I see this has a little dashed your Spirits:


Not a jot, not a jot.


Trust me, I fear it has:
I hope you will consider what is spoke
Comes from your Love.
But I do see you are moved:
I am to pray you, not to strain my speech
To grosser issues, nor to larger reach,
Then to Suspicion.

I will not.


Should you do so (my Lord)
My speech should fall into such vilde success,
Which my Thoughts aimed not.
Cassio's my worthy Friend:
My Lord, I see you are moved.

No, not much moved:
I do not think but Desdemona's honest.

Long live she so;
And long live you to think so.

And yet how Nature erring from it self.


I, there is the point:
As (to be bold with you)
Not to affect many proposed Matches
Of her own Clime, Complexion, and Degree,
Whereto we see in all things, Nature tends:
Foh, one may smell in such, a will most rank,
Foul disproportions, Thoughts unnatural.
But (pardon me) I do not in position
Distinctly speak of her, though I may fear
Her will, recoyling to her better judgment,
May fall to match you with her Country forms,
And happily repent.

Farewell, farewell:
If more thou do perceive, let me know more:
Set on thy wife to observe.
Leave me Iago.

My Lord, I take my leave.


Why did I marry?
This honest Creature (doubtless)
Sees, and knows more, much more then he unfolds.

My Lord, I would I might entreat your Honor
To scan this thing no farther: Leave it to time,
Although it is fit that Cassio have his Place;
For sure he filles it up with great Ability;
Yet if you please, to him off awhile:
You shall by that perceive him, and his means:
Note if your Lady strain his Entertainment
With any strong, or vehement importunity,
Much will be seen in that: In the mean time,
Let me be thought too busy in my fears,
(As worthy cause I have to fear I am)
And hold her free, I do beseech your Honor.

Fear not my government.


I once more take my leave.


This Fellow's of exceeding honesty,
And knows all Quantities with a learned Spirit
Of humane dealings. If I do prove her Haggard,
Though that her lesses were my dear heart strings,
I Would whistle her off, and let her down the wind
To prey at Fortune. Happily, for I am black,
And have not those soft parts of Conversation
That Chamberers have: Or for I am declined
Into the vale of years (yet that is not much)
She Is gone. I am abused, and my relief
Must be to loath her. Oh Curse of Marriage!
That we can call these delicate Creatures ours,
And not their Appetites? I had rather be a Toad,
And live upon the vapor of a Dungeon,
Then keep a corner in the thing I love
For others uses. Yet it is the plague to Great-ones,
Prerogatiu'd are they less then the Base,
It Is destiny vnshunnable, like death:
Even then, this forked plague is Fated to us,
When we do quicken. Look where she comes:
If she be false, Heaven mocked it self:
I Will not beleeue't.

How now, my dear Othello?
Your dinner, and the generous Islanders
By you invited, do attend your presence.

I am too blame.


Why do you speak so faintly?
Are you not well?

I have a pain upon my Forehead, here.


Why that is with watching, 'twill away again.
Let me but bind it hard, within this hour
It will be well.

Your Napkin is too little:
Let it alone: Come, I Will go in with you.

I am very sorry that you are not well.


I am glad I have found this Napkin:
This was her first remembrance from the Moore,
My wayward Husband has a hundred times
Wooed me to steal it. But she so loves the Token,
(For he coniur'd her, she should ever keep it)
That she reserues it evermore about her,
To kiss, and talk too. I Will have the work taken out,
And giu't Iago: what he will do with it
Heaven knows, not I:
I nothing, but to please his Fantasy.

How now? What do you here alone?


Do not you chide: I have a thing for you.


You have a thing for me?
It is a common thing --

Hah?


To have a foolish wife.


Oh, is that all? What will you give me now
For that same Handkerchiefe.

What Handkerchiefe?


What Handkerchiefe?
Why that the Moore first gave to Desdemona,
That which so often you did bid me steal.

Have stolen it from her?


No: but she let it drop by negligence,
And to the advantage, I being here, took't up:
Look, here it is.

A good wench, give it me.


What will you do with it, that you have been so earnest to have me filch it?


Why, what is that to you?


If it be not for some purpose of import,
Giu't me again. Poor Lady, she will run mad
When she shall lack it.

Be not acknowne on it:
I have use for it. Go, leave me.
I will in Cassio's Lodging loose this Napkin,
And let him find it. Trifles light as air,
Are to the iealious, confirmations strong,
As proofs of holy Writ. This may do something.
The Moore already changes with my poison:
Dangerous conceits, are in their Natures poisons,
Which at the first are scarce found to distaste:
But with a little act upon the blood,
Burn like the Mines of Sulphur. I did say so.
Look where he comes: Not Poppy, nor Mandragora,
Nor all the drowsy Syrrups of the world
Shall ever medicine thee to that sweet sleep
Which thou owd'st yesterday.

Ha, Ha, false to me?


Why how now General? No more of that.


Auant, be gone: Thou have set me on the Rack:
I swear it is better to be much abused,
Then but to know it a little.

How now, my Lord?


What sense had I, in her stolen hours of Lust?
I saw't not, thought it not: it harmed not me:
I slept the next night well, fed well, was free, and merry.
I found not Cassio's kisses on her Lips:
He that is robbed, not wanting what is stolen,
Let him not know it, and he is not robbed at all.

I am sorry to hear this?


I had been happy, if the general Camp,
Pyoners and all, had tasted her sweet Body,
So I had nothing known. Oh now, for ever
Farewell the Tranquil mind; farewell Content;
Farewell the plumed Troops, and the big Wars,
That makes Ambition, Virtue! Oh farewell;
Farewell the neighing Steed, and the shrill Trumpe,
The Spirit-stirring Drum, the Eare-piercing Fife,
The Royal Banner, and all Quality,
Pride, Pomp, and Circumstance of glorious War:
And O you mortal Engines, whose rude throats
The immortal Jove's dread Clamours, counterfeit,
Farewell: Othello's Occupation's gone.

Is It possible my Lord?


Villain, be sure thou prove my Love a Whore;
Be sure of it: Give me the Occular proof,
Or by the worth of mine eternal Soul,
Thou had bin better have bin borne a Dog
Then answer my waked wrath.

Is It come to this?


Make me to see it: or (at the least) so prove it,
That the probation bear no Hindge, nor Loope,
To hang a doubt on: Or woe upon thy life.

My Noble Lord.


If thou do slander her, and torture me,
Never pray more: Abandon all remorse
On Horrors head, Horrors accumulate:
Do deeds to make Heaven weep, all Earth amazed;
For nothing can thou to damnation add,
Greater then that.

O Grace! O Heaven forgive me!
Are you a Man? Have you a Soul? or Sense?
God buy you: take mine Office. Oh wretched Fool,
That love to make thine Honesty, a Vice!
Oh monstrous world! Take note, take note (O World)
To be direct and honest, is not safe.
I thank you for this profit, and from hence
I Will love no Friend, since Love breeds such offense.

Nay stay: thou should be honest.


I should be wise; for Honestie's a Fool,
And looses that it works for.

By the World,
I think my Wife be honest, and think she is not:
I think that thou art just, and think thou art not:
I Will have some proof. My name that was as fresh
As Dians Visage, is now begrim'd and black
As mine own face. If there be Cords, or Knives,
Poison, or Fire, or suffocating streams,
I Will not endure it. Would I were satisfied.

I see you are eaten up with Passion:
I do repent me, that I put it to you.
You would be satisfied?

Would? Nay, and I will.


And may: but how? How satisfied, my Lord?
Would you the super-vision grossly gape on?
Behold her top'd?

Death, and damnation. Oh!


It were a tedious difficulty, I think,
To bring them to that Prospect: Damn them then,
If ever mortal eyes do see them boulster
More then their own. What then? How then?
What shall I say? Where Is Satisfaction?
It is impossible you should see this,
Were they as prime as Goats, as hot as Monkeyes,
As salt as Wolves in pride, and Fools as gross
As Ignorance, made drunk. But yet, I say,
If imputation, and strong circumstances,
Which lead directly to the door of Truth,
Will give you satisfaction, you might haue't.

Give me a living reason she is disloyal.


I do not like the Office.
But since I am entered in this cause so far
(Pricked to it by foolish Honesty, and Love)
I will go on. I lay with Cassio lately,
And being troubled with a raging tooth,
I could not sleep. There are a kind of men,
So loose of Soul, that in their sleeps will mutter
Their Affairs: one of this kind is Cassio:
In sleep I heard him say, sweet Desdemona,
Let us be wary, let us hide our Loves,
And then (Sir) would he gripe, and wring my hand:
Cry, oh sweet Creature: then kiss me hard,
As if he plucked up kisses by the roots,
That grew upon my lips, laid his Leg ore my Thigh,
And sigh, and kiss, and then cry cursed Fate,
That gave thee to the Moore.

O monstrous! monstrous!


Nay, this was but his Dream.


But this denoted a fore-gone conclusion,
It Is a shrewd doubt, though it be but a Dream.

And this may help to thicken other proofs,
That do demonstrate thinly.

I Will tear her all to pieces.


Nay yet be wise; yet we see nothing done,
She may be honest yet: Tell me but this,
Have you not sometimes seen a Handkerchiefe
Spotted with Strawberries, in your wives hand?

I gave her such a one: 'twas my first gift.


I know not that: but such a Handkerchiefe
(I am sure it was your wives) did I to day
See Cassio wipe his Beard with.

If it be that.


If it be that, or any, it was hers.
It speaks against her with the other proofs.

O that the Slave had forty thousand lives:
One is too poor, too weak for my revenge.
Now do I see it is true. Look here Iago,
All my fond love thus do I blow to Heaven. It Is gone,
Arise black vengeance, from the hollow hell,
Yield up (O Love) thy Crown, and hearted Throne
To tyrannous Hate. Swell bosom with thy fraught,
For it is of Aspickes tongues.

Yet be content.


Oh blood, blood, blood.


Patience I say: your mind may change.


Never Iago. Like to the Ponticke Sea,
Whose Icie Current, and compulsiue course,
Neu'r keeps retyring ebb, but keeps due on
To the Proponticke, and the Hellespont:
Even so my bloody thoughts, with violent pace
Shall neu'r look back, neu'r ebb to humble Love,
Till that a capeable, and wide Revenge
Swallow them up. Now by yond Marble Heaven,
In the due reverence of a Sacred vow,
I here engage my words.

Do not rise yet:
Witness you euer-burning Lights above,
You Elements, that clip us round about,
Witness that here Iago does give up
The execution of his wit, hands, heart,
To wronged Othello's Service. Let him command,
And to obey shall be in me remorse,
What bloody business ever.

I greet thy love,
Not with vain thanks, but with acceptance bounteous,
And will upon the instant put thee to it.
Within these three days let me hear thee say,
That Cassio's not alive.

My Friend is dead:
It Is done at your Request.
But let her live.

Damn her lewd Minx:
O damn her, damn her.
Come go with me apart, I will withdraw
To furnish me with some swift means of death
For the fair Devil.
Now art thou my Lieutenant.

I am your own for ever.


Do you know Sirrah, where Lieutenant Cassio lies?


I dare not say he lies any where.


Why man?


He Is a Soldier, and for me to say a Soldier lies, it is stabbing.


Go too: where lodges he?


To tell you where he lodges, is to tell you where I lie.


Can any thing be made of this?


I know not where he lodges, and for me to devise a lodging, and say he lies
here, or he lies there, were to lie in mine own throat


Can you enquire him out? and be edified by report?


I will Catechize the world for him, that is, make Questions, and by them
answer


Seek him, bid him come hither: tell him, I have moved my Lord on his
behalf, and hope all will be well


To do this, is within the compass of man's Wit, and therefore I will attempt
the doing it


Where should I loose the Handkerchiefe, Aemilia?


I know not Madam.


Believe me, I had rather have lost my purse
Full of Cruzadoes. And but my Noble Moore
Is true of mind, and made of no such baseness,
As iealious Creatures are, it were enough
To put him to ill-thinking.

Is he not iealious?


Who, he? I think the Sun where he was borne,
Drew all such humors from him.

Look where he comes.


I will not leave him now, till Cassio be
Called to him. How is it with you, my Lord?

Well my good Lady. Oh hardness to dissemble!
How do you, Desdemona?

Well, my good Lord.


Give me your hand.
This hand is moist my Lady.

It has felt no age, nor known no sorrow.


This argues fruitfulness, and liberal heart:
Hot, hot, and moist. This hand of yours requires
A sequester from Liberty: Fasting, and Prayer,
Much Castigation, Exercise devout,
For here is a young, and sweating Devil here
That commonly rebels: It Is a good hand,
A frank one.

You may (indeed) say so:
For 'twas that hand that gave away my heart.

A liberal hand. The hearts of old, gave hands:
But our new Heraldry is hands, not hearts.

I cannot speak of this:
Come, now your promise.

What promise, Chucke?


I have sent to bid Cassio come speak with you.


I have a salt and sorry Rhewme offends me:
Lend me thy Handkerchiefe.

Here my Lord.


That which I gave you.


I have it not about me.


Not?


No indeed, my Lord.


That Is a fault: That Handkerchiefe
Did an Egyptian to my Mother give:
She was a Charmer, and could almost read
The thoughts of people. She told her, while she kept it,
'T would make her Amiable, and subdue my Father
Entirely to her love: But if she lost it,
Or made a Gift of it, my Fathers eye
Should hold her loathed, and his Spirits should hunt
After new Fancies. She dying, gave it me,
And bid me (when my Fate would have me W^u'd)
To give it her. I did to; and take heed on it,
Make it a Darling, like your precious eye:
To loose't, or giue't away, were such perdition,
As nothing else could match.

Is It possible?


It Is true: There Is Magic in the web of it:
A Sybill that had numbered in the world
The Sun to course, two hundred compasses,
In her Prophetticke fury sowed the Work:
The Worms were hallowed, that did breed the Silk,
And it was did in Mummey, which the Skillful
Conseru'd of Maidens hearts.

Indeed? Is It true?


Most veritable, therefore look to it well.


Then would to Heaven, that I had never seene't?


Ha? wherefore?


Why do you speak so startingly and rash?


Is It lost? Is It gone? Speak, is it out of the way?


Bless us.


Say you?


It is not lost: but what and if it were?


How?


I say it is not lost.


Fetched, let me see it.


Why so I can: but I will not now:
This is a trick to put me from my suite,
Pray you let Cassio be received again.

Fetch me the Handkerchiefe,
My mind mis-giues.

Come, come: you will never meet a more sufficient man.


The Handkerchiefe.


A man that all his time
Has founded his good Fortunes on your love;
Shared dangers with you.

The Handkerchiefe.


Insooth, you are too blame.


Away.


Is not this man iealious?


I neu'r saw this before.
Sure, there is some wonder in this Handkerchikfe,
I am most unhappy in the loss of it.

It Is not a year or two shows us a man:
They are all but Stomachs, and we all but Food,
They eat us hungerly, and when they are full
They belch us.
Look you, Cassio and my Husband.

There is no other way: it is she must do it:
And lo the happiness: go, and importune her.

How now (good Cassio) what is the news with you?


Madam, my former suite. I do beseech you,
That by your virtuous means, I may again
Exist, and be a member of his love,
Whom I, with all the Office of my heart
Entirely honor, I would not be delayed.
If my offense, be of such mortal kind,
That nor my Service past, nor present Sorrows,
Nor purposed merit in futurity,
Can ransom me into his love again,
But to know so, must be my benefit:
So shall I cloth me in a forced content,
And shut my self up in some other course
To Fortunes Alms.

Alas (thrice-gentle Cassio)
My Aduocation is not now in Tune;
My Lord, is not my Lord; nor should I know him,
Were he in Favor, as in Humor altered.
So help me every spirit sanctified,
As I have spoken for you all my best,
And stood within the blanke of his displeasure
For my free speech. You must awhile be patient:
What I can do, I will: and more I will
Then for my self, I dare. Let that suffice you.

Is my Lord angry?


He went hence but now:
And certainly in strange unquietness.

Can he be angry? I have seen the Cannon
When it has blown his Ranks into the Air,
And like the Devil from his very Arm
Puff't his own Brother: And is he angry?
Something of moment then: I will go meet him,
There Is matter in it indeed, if he be angry.

I prithee do so. Something sure of State,
Either from Venice, or some vnhatch'd practice
Made demonstrable here in Cyprus, to him,
Has pudled his clear Spirit: and in such cases,
Men's Natures wrangle with inferior things,
Though great ones are their object. It Is even so.
For let our finger ache, and it endues
Our other healthful members, even to a sense
Of pain. Nay, we must think men are not Gods,
Nor of them look for such obseruancie
As fits the Bridal. Beshrew me much, Aemilia,
I was (unhandsome Warrior, as I am)
Arraigning his unkindness with my soul:
But now I find, I had suborned the Witness,
And he is Indicted falsely.

Pray heaven it be
State matters, as you think, and no Conception,
Nor no Iealious Toy, concerning you.

Alas the day, I never gave him cause.


But Iealious souls will not be answered so;
They are not ever iealious for the cause,
But iealious, for they are iealious. It is a Monster
Begot upon it self, borne on it self.

Heaven keep the Monster from Othello's mind.


Lady, Amen.


I will go seek him. Cassio, walk here about:
If I do find him fit, I Will move your suite,
And seek to effect it to my uttermost.

I humbly thank your Ladyship.


'Saue you (Friend Cassio.)


What make you from home?
How is it with you, my most fair Bianca?
Indeed (sweet Love) I was coming to your house.

And I was going to your Lodging, Cassio.
What? keep a week away? Seven days, and Nights?
Eight score eight hours? And Lovers absent hours
More tedious then the Dial, eight score times?
Oh weary reckoning.

Pardon me, Bianca:
I have this while with leaden thoughts been pressed,
But I shall in a more continuate time
Strike off this score of absence. Sweet Bianca
Take me this work out.

Oh Cassio, whence came this?
This is some Token from a newer Friend,
To the felt-Absence: now I feel a Cause:
Is It come to this? Well, well.

Go too, woman:
Throw your vilde gesses in the Devils teeth,
From whence you have them. You are iealious now,
That this is from some Mistress, some remembrance;
No, in good troth Bianca.

Why, who is is it?


I know not neither:
I found it in my Chamber,
I like the work well; Ere it be demanded
(As like enough it will) I would have it coppied:
Take it, and do it, and leave me for this time.

Leave you? Wherefore?


I do attend here on the General,
And think it no addition nor my wish
To have him see me woman'd.

Why, I ptay you?


Not that I love you not.


But that you do not love me.
I pray you bring me on the way a little,
And say, if I shall see you soon at night?

It Is but a little way that I can bring you,
For I attend here: But I Will see you soon.

It Is very good: I must be circumstanc'd.


Will you think so?


Think so, Iago?


What, to kiss in private?


An vnauthoriz'd kiss?


Or to be naked with her Friend in bed,
An hour, or more, not meaning any harm?

Naked in bed (Iago) and not mean harm?
It is hypocrisy against the Devil:
They that mean virtuously, and yet do so,
The Devil their virtue tempts, and they tempt Heaven.

If they do nothing, it is a Venial slip:
But if I give my wife a Handkerchiefe.

What then?


Why then it is hers (my Lord) and being hers,
She may (I think) bestow't on any man.

She is Protectresse of her honor too:
May she give that?

Her honor is an Essence that is not seen,
They have it very often, that have it not.
But for the Handkerchiefe.

By heaven, I would most gladly have forgot it:
Thou said (oh, it comes ore my memory,
As does the Raven over the infectious house:
Boading to all) he had my Handkerchiefe.

I: what of that?


That Is not so good now.


What if I had said, I had seen him do you wrong?
Or heard him say (as Knaves be such abroad,
Who having by their own importunate suit,
Or voluntary dotage of some Mistress,
Convinced or supplied them cannot choose
But they must blab.)

Has he said any thing?


He has (my Lord) but be you well assured,
No more then he will vn-sweare.

What has he said?


Why, that he did: I know not what he did.


What? What?


Lie.


With her?


With her? On her: what you will.


Lie with her? lie on her? We say lie on her, when they be-lye-her. Lie with
her: that is fullsome: Handkerchiefe: Confessions: Handkerchiefe. To confess,
and be hanged for his labor. First, to be hanged, and then to confess: I
tremble at it. Nature would not inuest her self in such shadowing passion,
without some Instruction. It is not words that shakes me thus, (pish) Noses,
Ears, and Lips: is it possible. Confess? Handkerchiefe? O devil


Work on,
My Medicine works. Thus credulous Fools are caught,
And many worthy, and chaste Dames even thus,
(All guiltless) meet reproach: what hoa? My Lord?
My Lord, I say: Othello.
How now Cassio?

What Is the matter?


My Lord is fallen into an Epilepsie,
This is his second Fit: he had one yesterday.

Rub him about the Temples.


The Lethargy must have his quiet course:
If not, he foames at mouth: and by and by
Breaks out to savage madness. Look, he stirs:
Do you withdraw your self a little while,
He will recover straight: when he is gone,
I would on great occasion, speak with you.
How is it General? Have you not hurt your head?

Do thou mock me?


I mock you not, by Heaven:
Would you would bear your Fortune like a Man.

A Horned man's a Monster, and a Beast.


There Is many a Beast then in a populous City,
And many a civil Monster.

Did he confess it?


Good Sir, be a man:
Think every bearded fellow that is but yoked
May draw with you. There Is Millions now alive,
That nightly lie in those improper beds,
Which they dare swear peculiar. Your case is better.
Oh, it is the spite of hell, the Fiends Arch-mock,
To lip a wanton in a secure Cowch;
And to suppose her chaste. No, let me know,
And knowing what I am, I know what she shall be.

Oh, thou art wise: it is certain.


Stand you a while apart,
Confine your self but in a patient Lis^,
Whilst you were here, o're-whelmed with your grief
(A passion most resulting such a man)
Cassio came hither. I shifted him away,
And laid good scuses upon your Ecstasy,
Bad him anon return: and here speak with me,
The which he promised. Do but encaue your self,
And mark the Fleeres, the Gybes, and notable Scorns
That dwell in every Region of his face.
For I will make him tell the Tale anew;
Where, how, how often, how long ago, and when
He has, and is again to cope your wife.
I say, but mark his gesture: marry Patience,
Or I shall say y' are all in all in Spleen,
And nothing of a man.

Do thou hear, Iago,
I will be found most cunning in my Patience:
But (do thou hear) most bloody.

That Is not amiss,
But yet keep time in all: will you withdraw?
Now will I question Cassio of Bianca,
A Huswife, that by selling her desires
Buys her self Bread, and Cloth. It is a Creature
That dotes on Cassio, (as it is the Strumpets plague
To be-guile many, and be be-guil'd by one)
He, when he hears of her, cannot restrain
From the excess of Laughter. Here he comes.
As he shall smile, Othells shall go mad:
And his vnbookish Jealousy must conserve
Poor Cassio's smiles, gestures, and light behauiours
Quite in the wrong. How do you Lieutenant?

The worser, that you give me the addition,
Whose want even killes me.

Ply Desdemona well, and you are sure on it:
Now, if this Suit lay in Bianca's dowre,
How quickly should you speed?

Alas poor Caitiffe.


Look how he laughes already.


I never knew woman love man so.


Alas poor Rogue, I think indeed she loves me.


Now he denies it faintly: and laughes it out.


Do you hear Cassio?


Now he importunes him
To tell it over: go too, well said, well said.

She gives it out, that you shall marry her.
Do you intend it?

Ha, ha, ha.


Do ye triumph, Roman? do you triumph?


I marry. What? A customer; prithee bear
Some Charity to my wit, do not think it
So unwholesome. Ha, ha, ha.

So, so, so, so: they laugh, that winnes.


Why the cry goes, that you marry her.


Prithee say true.


I am a very Villain else.


Have you scoar'd me? Well.


This is the Monkeys own giving out:
She is persuaded I will marry her
Out of her own love and flattery, not out of my promise.

Iago becomes me: now he begins the story.


She was here even now: she haunts me in every place. I was the other day
talking on the Sea-banke with certain Venetians, and thither comes the Bauble,
and falls me thus about my neck


Crying oh dear Cassio, as it were: his iesture imports it.


So hangs, and lolls, and weeps upon me:
So shakes, and pulls me. Ha, ha, ha.

Now he tells how she plucked him to my Chamber: oh, I see that nose of yours,
but not that dog, I shall throw it to


Well, I must leave her company.


Before me: look where she comes.


It Is such another Fitchew: marry a perfumed one?
What do you mean by this haunting of me?

Let the devil, and his dam haunt you: what did you mean by that same
Handkerchiefe, you gave me even now? I was a fine Fool to take it: I must take
out the work? A likely piece of work, that you should find it in your
Chamber, and know not who left it there. This is some Minxes token, and I must
take out the work^? There, give it your Hobbey-horse, wheresoever you had it,
I Will take out no work on it


How now, my sweet Bianca?
How now? How now?

By Heaven, that should be my Handkerchiefe.


If you will come to supper to night you may, if you will not, come when you are
next prepared for


After her: after her.


I must, she will rail in the streets else.


Will you sup there?


Yes, I intend so.


Well, I may chance to see you: for I would very fame speak with you.


Prithee come: will you?


Go too: say no more.


How shall I murder him, Iago.


Did you perceive how he laughed at his vice?


Oh, Iago.


And did you see the Handkerchiefe?


Was that mine?


Yours by this hand: and to see how he prizes the foolish woman your wife: she
gave it him, and he has given it his whore


I would have him nine years a killing:
A fine woman, a fair woman, a sweet woman?

Nay, you must forget that.


I, let her ^ot and perish, and be damned to night, for she shall not live. No,
my heart is turned to stone: I strike it, and it hurts my hand. Oh, the world
has not a sweeter Creature: she might lie by an Emperors side, and command
him Taskes


Nay, that is not your way.


Hang her, I do but say what she is: so delicate with her Needle: an admirable
Musician. Oh she will sing the Savageness out of a Bear: of so high and
plenteous wit, and invention


She Is the worse for all this.


Oh, a thousand, a thousand times:
And the^ of so gentle a condition?

I too gentle.


Nay that is certain:
But yet the pity of it, Iago: oh Iago, the pity of it Iago.

If you are so fond over her iniquity: give her pattent to offend, for if it
touch not you, it comes near no body


I will chop her into Messes: Cuckold me?


Oh, it is foul in her.


With mine Officer?


That Is fouler.


Get me some poison, Iago, this night. I Will not expostulate with her: least her
body and beauty vnprouide my mind again: this night Iago


Do it not with poison, strangle her in her bed,
Even the bed she has contaminated.

Good, good:
The Justice of it pleases: very good.

And for Cassio, let me be his undertaker:
You shall hear more by midnight.

Excellent good: What Trumpet is that same?


I warrant something from Venice,
It Is Lodouico, this, comes from the Duke.
See, your wife's with him.

Save you worthy General.


With all my heart Sir.


The Duke, and the Senators of Venice greet you.


I kiss the Instrument of their pleasures.


And what is the news, good cozen Lodouico?


I am very glad to see you Signior:
Welcome to Cyprus.

I thank you: how does Lieutenant Cassio?


Lives Sir,


Cozen, there is fallen between him, and my Lord,
An unkind breach: but you shall make all well.

Are you sure of that?


My Lord?


This fail you not to do, as you will --


He did not call: he is busy in the paper,
Is there division 'twixt my Lord, and Cassio?

A most unhappy one: I would do much
TO atone them, for the love I bear to Cassio.

Fire, and brimestone.


My Lord.


Are you wise?


What is he angry?


May be th Letter moved him.
For as I think, they do command him home,
Deputing Cassio in his Government.

Trust me, I am glad on it.


Indeed?


My Lord?


I am glad to see you mad.


Why, sweet Othello?


Devil.


I have not deserved this.


My Lord, this would not be believed in Venice,
Though I should swear I saw't. It Is very much,
Make her amends: she weeps.

Oh devil, devil:
If that the Earth could teeme with woman's tears,
Each drop she falls, would prove a Crocodile:
Out of my sight.

I will not stay to offend you.


Truly obedient Lady:
I do beseech your Lordship call her back.

Mistress.


My Lord.


What would you with her, Sir?


Who I, my Lord?


I, you did wish, that I would make her turn:
Sir, she can turn, and turn: and yet go on
And turn again. And she can weep, Sir, weep.
And she is obedient: as you say obedient.
Very obedient: proceed you in your tears.
Concerning this Sir, (oh well-painted passion)
I am commanded home: get you away:
I Will send for you anon. Sir I obey the Mandate,
And will return to Venice. Hence, auaunt:
Cassio shall have my Place. And Sir, to night
I do entreat, that we may sup together.
You are welcome Sir to Cyprus.
Goats, and Monkeys.

Is this the Noble Moore, whom our full Senate
Call all in all sufficient? Is this the Nature
Whom Passion could not shake? Whose solid virtue
The shot of Accident, nor dart of Chance
Could neither graze, nor pierce?

He is much changed.


Are his wits safe? Is he not light of Brain?


He Is that he is: I may not breath my censure.
What he might be: if what he might, he is not,
I would to heaven he were.

What? Strike his wife?


'Faith that was not so well: yet would I knew
That stroke would prove the worst.

Is it his use?
Or did the Letters, work upon his blood,
And new create his fault?

Alas, alas:
It is not honesty in me to speak
What I have seen, and known. You shall observe him,
And his own courses will deonte him so,
That I may save my speech: do but go after
And mark how he continues.

I am sorry that I am deceived in him.


You have seen nothing then?


Nor ever heard: nor ever did suspect.


Yes; you have seen Cassio, and she together.


But then I saw no harm: and then I heard,
Each syllable that breath made up between them.

What? Did they never whisper?


Never my Lord.


Nor send you out of the way?


Never.


To fetch her Fan, her Gloves, her Mask, nor nothing?


Never my Lord.


That Is strange.


I durst (my Lord) to wager, she is honest:
Lay down my Soul at stake: If you think other,
Remove your thought. It does abuse your bosom:
If any wretch have put this in your head,
Let Heaven requit it with the Serpents curse,
For if she be not honest, chaste, and true,
There Is no man happy. The purest of their Wives
Is foul as Slander.

Bid her come hither: go.
She says enough: yet she is a simple Baud
That cannot say as much. This is a subtle Whore:
A Closset Lock and Key of Villainous Secrets,
And yet she will kneel, and pray: I have seen her do it.

My Lord, what is your will?


Pray you Chucke come hither.


What is your pleasure?


Let me see your eyes: look in my face.


What horrible Fancie's this?


Some of your Function Mistress:
Leave Procreants alone, and shut the door:
Cough, or cry hem; if any body come:
Your Mystery, your Mystery: May dispatch.

Upon my knee, what does your speech import*
I understand a Fury in your words.

Why? What art thou?


Your wife my Lord: your true and loyal wife.


Come swear it: damn thy self, least being like one of Heaven, the devils
themselves should fear to ceaze thee. Therefore be double damned: swear thou
art honest


Heaven does truly know it.


Heaven truly knows, that thou art false as hell.


To whom my Lord?
With whom? How am I false?

Ah Desdemon, away, away, away.


Alas the heavy day: why do you weep?
Am I the motive of these tears my Lord?
If happily you my Father do suspect,
An Instrument of this your calling back,
Lay not your blame on me: if you have lost him,
I have lost him too.

Had^t pleased Heaven,
To try me with Affliction, had they rained
All kind of Sores, and Shames on my bare-head:
Steeped me in poverty to the very lips,
Given to Captivity, me, and my utmost hopes,
I should have found in some place of my Soul
A drop of patience. But alas, to make me
The fixed Figure for the time of Scorn,
To point his slow, and moving finger at.
Yet could I bear that too, well, very well:
But there where I have garnerd up my heart,
Where either I must live, or bear no life,
The Fountain from the which my current runs,
Or else dries up: to be discarded thence,
Or keep it as a Cesterne, for foul Toades
To knot and gender in. Turn thy complexion there:
Patience, thou young and Rose-lip'd Cherubin,
I here look grim as hell.

I hope my Noble Lord esteems me honest.


Oh I, as Summer Flies are in the Shambles,
That quicken even with blowing. Oh thou weed:
Who art so lovely fair, and smell'st so sweet,
That the Sense aches at thee,
Would thou had never bin borne.

Alas, what ignorant sin have I committed?


Was this fair Paper? This most goodly Book
Made to write Whore upon? What committed,
Committed? Oh, thou public Commoner,
I should make very Forges of my cheeks,
That would to Cynders burn up Modesty,
Did I but speak thy deeds. What committed?
Heaven stoppes the Nose at it, and the Moon winks:
The baudy wind that kisses all it meets,
Is hushed within the hollow Mine of Earth
And will not hear't. What committed?

By Heaven you do me wrong.


Are not you a Strumpet?


No, as I am a Christian.
If to preserve this vessel for my Lord,
From any other foul unlawful touch
Be not to be a Strumpet, I am none.

What, not a Whore?


No, as I shall be saved.


Is It possible?


Oh Heaven forgive us.


I cry you mercy then.
I took you for that cunning Whore of Venice,
That married with Othello. You Mistress,
That have the office opposite to Saint Peter,
And keeps the gate of hell. You, you: I you.
We have done our course: there is money for your pains:
I pray you turn the key, and keep our counsel.

Alas, what do'^ this Gentleman conceive?
How do you Madam? how do you my good Lady?

Faith, half a sleep.


Good Madam,
What Is the matter with my Lord?

With who?


Why, with my Lord, Madam?


Who is thy Lord?


He that is yours, sweet Lady.


I have none: do not talk to me, Aemilia,
I cannot weep: nor answers have I none,
But what should go by water. Prithee to night,
Lay on my bed my wedding sheets, remember,
And call thy husband hither.

Here Is a change indeed.


It Is meet I should be used so: very meet.
How have I bin behau'd, that he might stick
The small'st opinion on my least misuse?

What is your pleasure Madam?
How is it with you?

I cannot tell: those that do teach young Babes
Do it with gentle means, and easy taskes.
He might have chid me so: for in good faith
I am a Child to chiding.

What is the matter Lady?


Alas (Iago) my Lord has so bewhor'd her,
Thrown such dispight, and heavy terms upon her
That true hear^s cannot bear it.

Am I that name, Iago?


What name (fair Lady?)


Such as she said my Lord did say I was.


He called her whore: a Beggar in his drink:
Could not have laid such terms upon his Callet.

Why did he so?


I do not know: I am sure I am none such.


Do not weep, do not weep: alas the day.


Has she forsook so many Noble Matches?
Her Father? And her Country? And her Friends?
To be called Whore? Would it not make one weep?

It is my wretched Fortune.


Beshrew him for it:
How comes this Trick upon him?

Nay, Heaven does know.


I will be hanged, if some eternal Villain,
Some busy and insinuating Rogue,
Some cogging, cozening Slave, to get some Office,
Have not devised this Slander: I will be hanged else.

Fie, there is no such man: it is impossible.


If any such there be, Heaven pardon him.


A halter pardon him:
And hell gnaw his bones.
Why should he call her Whore?
Who keeps her company?
What Place? What Time?
What Form? What liklyhood?
The Moore's abused by some most villainous Knave,
Some base notorious Knave, some scuruy Fellow.
Oh Heavens, that such companions thou'd'st unfold,
And put in every honest hand a whip
To lash the Rascals naked through the world,
Even from the East to the West.

Speak within door.


Oh fie upon them: some such Squire he was
That turned your wit, the seamy-side without,
And made you to suspect me with the Moore.

You are a Fool: go too.


Alas Iago,
What shall I do to win my Lord again?
Good Friend, go to him: for by this light of Heaven,
I know not how I lost him. Here I kneel:
If ere my will did trespass against his Love,
Either in discourse of thought, or actual deed,
Or that mine Eyes, mine Ears, or any Sense
Delighted them: or any other Form.
Or that I do not yet, and ever did,
And ever will, (though he do shake me off
To beggarly diuorcement) Love him dearly,
Comfort forswear me. Unkindness may do much,
And his unkindness may defeat my life,
But never taynt my Love. I cannot say Whore,
It does abhor me now I speak the word,
To do the Act, that might the addition earne,
Not the worlds Mass of vanity could make me.

I pray you be content: it is but his humor:
The business of the State does him offense.

If 'twere no other.


It is but so, I warrant,
Hark how these Instruments summon to supper:
The Messengers of Venice stays the meat,
Go in, and weep not: all things shall be well.
How now Rodorigo?

I do not find
That thou deal'st justly with me.

What in the contrary?


Every day thou dafts me with some devise Iago, and rather, as it seems to me
now, keep'st from me all conueniencie, then suppliest me with the least
advantage of hope: I will indeed no longer endure it. Nor am I yet persuaded to
put up in peace, what already I have foolishly suffered


Will you hear me Rodorigo?


I have heard too much: and your words and Performances are no kin together.


You charge me most unjustly.


With naught but truth: I have wasted my self out of my means. The Jewels you
have had from me to deliver Desdemona, would half have corrupted a Votarist.
You have told me she has received them, and returned me expectations and
comforts of sudden respect, and acquaintance, but I find none


Well, go too: very well.


Very well* go too: I cannot go too, (man) nor it is not very well. Nay I think
it is scuruy: and begin to find my self fopt in it


Very well.


I tell you, it is not very well: I will make my self known to Desdemona. If
she will return me my Jewels, I will give over my Suit, and repent my
unlawful solicitation. If not, assure your self, I will seek satisfaction of
you


You have said now.


I: and said nothing but what I protest intendment of doing.


Why, now I see there is mettle in thee: and even from this instant do build on
thee a better opinion then ever before: give me thy ^and Rodorigo. Thou have
taken against me a most just exception: but yet I protest I have dealt most
directly in thy Affair


It has not appeer'd.


I grant indeed it has not appeer'd: and your suspicion is not without wit and
judgment. But Rodorigo, if thou have that in thee indeed, which I have greater
reason to* believe now then ever (I mean purpose, Courage, and Valor) this
night show it. If thou the next night following enjoy not Desdemona, take me
from this world with Treachery, and devise Engines for my life


Well: what is it? Is it within, reason and compass?


Sir, there is especial Commission come from Venice to depute Cassio in
Othello's place


Is that true? Why then Othello and Desdemona return again to Venice.


Oh no: he goes into Mauritania and takes away with him the fair Desdemona,
unless his abode be lingered here by some accident. Wherein none can be so
determinate, as the removing of Cassio


How do you mean removing him?


Why, by making him incapable of Othello's place: knocking out his brains.


And that you would have me to do.


I: if you dare do your self a profit, and a right. He sups to night with a
Harlotry: and thither will I go to him. He knows not yet of his Honorable
Fortune, if you will watch his going thence (which I will fashion to fall out
between twelve and one) you may take him at your pleasure. I will be near to
second your Attempt, and he shall fall between us. Come, stand not amazed at
it, but go along with me: I will show you such a necessity in his death, that
you shall think your self bound to put it on him. It is now high supper time:
and the night grows to wast. About it


I will hear further reason for this.


And you shall be satisfied.


I do beseech you Sir, trouble your self no further.


Oh pardon me: 'twill do me good to walk.


Madam, good night: I humbly thank your Ladyship.


Your Honor is most welcome.


Will you walk Sir? Oh Desdemona.


My Lord.


Get you to bed on the instant, I will be returned forth with: dismiss your
Attendant there: looked be done


I will my Lord.


How goes it now? He looks gentler then he did.


He says he will return incontinent,
And has commanded me to go to bed,
And bid me to dismiss you.

Dismiss me?


It was his bidding: therefore good Aemilia,
Give me my nightly wearing* and adieu.
We must not now displease him.

I, would you had never seen him.


So would not I: my love does so approve him,
That even his stubbornness, his checks, his frowns,
(Prithee vn-pin me) have grace and favor.

I have laid those Sheets you bad me on the bed.


All Is one: good Father, how foolish are our minds?
If I do die before, prithee shrowed me
In one of these same Sheets.

Come, come: you talk.


My Mother had a Maid called Barbary,
She was in love: and he she loved proved mad,
And did forsake her. She had a Song of Willough,
An old thing 'twas: but it expressed her Fortune,
And she died singing it. That Song to night,
Will not go from my mind: I have much to do,
But to go hang my head all at one side
And sing it like poor Brabarie: prithee dispatch.

Shall I go fetch your Night-gowne?


No* va-pin me here,
This Lodouico is a proper man.

A very handsome man.


He speaks well.


I know a Lady in Venice would have walked barefoot to Palestine for a touch of
his nether lip


The poor Soul sat singing, by a Sicamour tree.
Sing all a green Willough:
Her hand on her bosom her head on her knee,
Sing Willough, Willough, Willough.
The fresh Streams ran by her, and murmured her moanes
Sing Willough, etc.
Her salt tears fell from her, and softened the stones,
Sing Willough, etc. (Lay by these)
Willough, Willough. (Prithee high thee: he will come anon)
Sing all a green Willough must be my Garland.
Let no body blame him, his scorn I approve.
(Nay that is not next. Hark, who is it that knocks?

It Is the wind.


I called my Love false Love: but what said he then?
Sing Willough, etc.
If I court mo women, you will couch with mo men.
So get thee gone, good night: mine eyes do itch:
Does that boade weeping?

It Is neither here, nor there.


I have heard it said so. O these Men, these men!
Do thou in conscience think (tell me Aemilia)
That there be women do abuse their husbands
In such gross kind?

There be some such, no question.


Would thou do such a deed for all the world?


Why, would not you?


No, by this Heavenly light.


Nor I neither, by this Heavenly light:
I might do it as well in the dark.

Would thou do such a deed for all the world?


The world's a huge thing:
It is a great price, for a small vice.

In Troth, I think thou would not.


In Troth I think I should, and vndoo't when I had done. Marry, I would not do
such a thing for a joint Ring, nor for measures of Lawne, nor for Gowns,
Petticoats, nor Caps, nor any petty exhibition. But for all the whole world:
why, who would not make her husband a Cuckold, to make him a Monarch? I should
venture Purgatory for it


Beshrew me, if I would do such a wrong
For the whole world.

Why, the wrong is but a wrong in the world; and having the world for your
labor, it is a wrong in your own world, and you might quickly make it right


I do not think there is any such woman.


Yes, a dozen: and as many to' the vantage, as would store the world they played
for
But I do think it is their Husbands faults
If Wives do fall: (Say, that they slack their duties,
And power our Treasures into foreign laps;
Or else break out in peevish Iealousies,
Throwing restraint upon us: Or say they strike us,
Or scant our former having in despite)
Why we have galls: and though we have some Grace,
Yet have we some Revenge. Let Husbands know,
Their wives have sense like them: They see, and smell,
And have their Palats both for sweet, and sour,
As Husbands have. What is it that they do,
When they change us for others? Is it Sport?
I think it is: and does Affection breed it?
I think it does. Is It Frailty that thus erres?
It is so too. And have not we Affections?
Desires for Sport? and Frailty, as men have?
Then let them use us well: else let them know,
The illes we do, their illes instruct us so.

Good night, good night:
Heaven me such uses send,
Not to pick bad, from bad; but by bad, mend.

Here, stand behind this Bark,
Straight will he come:
Wear thy good Rapier bare, and put it home:
Quick, quick, fear nothing; I Will be at thy Elbow,
It makes us, or it marres us, think on that,
And fix most firm thy Resolution.

Be near at hand, I may miscarry in it.


Here, at thy hand: Be bold, and take thy stand.


I have no great devotion to the deed,
And yet he has given me satisfying Reasons:
It Is but a man gone. Forth my Sword: he dies.

I have rubbed this young Q^at almost to the sense,
And he grows angry. Now, whether he kill Cassio,
Or Cassio him, or each do kill the other,
Every way makes my gain. Live Rodorigo,
He calls me to a restitution large
Of Gold, and Jewels, that I bob'd from him,
As Gifts to Desdemona.
It must not be: If Cassio do remain,
He has a daily beauty in his life,
That makes me ugly: and besides, the Moore
May unfold me to him: there stand I in much peril:
No, he must dye. But so, I heard him coming.

I know his gate, it is he: Villain thou dyest.


That thrust had been mine enemy indeed,
But that my Coat is better then thou know:
I will make proof of thine.

Oh, I am slain.


I am maym'd for ever:
Help hoa: Murder, murder.

The voice of Cassio* Iago keeps his word.


O Villain that I am.


It is even so.


Oh help hoa: Light, a Surgeon.


It Is he: O brave Iago, honest, and just,
That have such Noble sense of thy Friends wrong,
Thou teach me. Minion, your dear lies dead,
And your unblessed Fate highes: Strumpet I come:
For of my heart, those Charms thine Eyes, are blotted.
Thy Bed lust-stain'd, shall with Lusts blood be spotted.

What hoa? no Watch? No passage?
Murder, Murder.

It Is some mischance, the voice is very direful.


Oh help.


Hark.


Oh wretched Villain.


Two or three groan. It Is heavy night;
These may be counterfeits: Let Us think it unsafe
To come into the cry, without more help.

Nobody come: then shall I bleed to death.


Hark.


Here Is one comes in his shirt, with Light, and Weapons.


Who Is there?
Who Is noise is this that cries on murder?

We do not know.


Do not you hear a cry?


Here, here: for heaven sake help me.


What Is the matter?


This is Othello's Ancient, as I take it.


The same indeed, a very valiant Fellow.


What are you here, that cry so grievously?


Iago? Oh I am spoiled, undone by Villains:
Give me some help.

O me, Lieutenant!
What Villains have done this?

I think that one of them is heereabout*
And cannot make away.

Oh treacherous Villains:
What are you there? Come in, and give some help.

O help me there.


That Is one of them.


Oh murderous Slave! O Villain!


O damned Iago! O inhumane Dog*


Kill men in the dark?
Where be these bloody Thieves?
How silent is this Town? Hoa, murder, murder.
What may you be? Are you of good, or evil?

As you shall prove us, praise us.


Signior Lodouico?


He Sir.


I cry you mercy: here is Cassio hurt by Villains.


Cassio?


How is it Brother?


My Leg is cut in two.


Marry heaven forbid:
Light Gentlemen, I Will bind it with my shirt.

What is the matter hoa? Who is it that cried?


Who is it that cried?


Oh my dear Cassio,
My sweet Cassio: Oh Cassio, Cassio, Cassio.

O notable Strumpet. Cassio, may you suspect
Who they should be, that have thus mangled you?

No.


I am sorry to find you thus;
I have been to seek you.

Lend me a Garter. So: -- Oh for a Chair
To bear him easily hence.

Alas he faints. Oh Cassio, Cassio, Cassio.


Gentlemen all, I do suspect this Trash
To be a party in this Injury.
Patience a while, good Cassio. Come, come;
Lend me a Light: know we this face, or no?
Alas my Friend, and my dear Countryman
Rodorigo? No: Yes sure: Yes, it is Rodorigo.

What, of Venice?


Even he Sir: Did you know him?


Know him? I.


Signior Gratiano? I cry your gentle pardon:
These bloody accidents must excuse my Manners,
That so neglected you.

I am glad to see you.


How do you Cassio? Oh* a Chair, a Chair.


Rodorigo?


He, he, it is he:
Oh that is well said, the Chair.
Some good man bear him carefully from hence,
I Will fetch the Generall's Surgeon. For you Mistress,
Save you your labor. He that lies slain here (Cassio)
Was my dear friend. What malice was between you?

None in the world: nor do I know the man?


What? look you pale? Oh bear him of the Air.
Stay you good Gentlemen. Look you pale, Mistress?
Do you perceive the gastnesse of her eye?
Nay, if you stare, we shall hear more anon.
Behold her well: I pray you look upon her:
Do you see Gentlemen? Nay, guiltiness will speak
Though tongues were out of use.

Alas, what is the matter?
What is the matter, Husband?

Cassio has here bin set on in the dark
By Rodorigo, and Fellows that are escaped:
He Is almost slain, and Rodorigo quite dead.

Alas good Gentleman: alas good Cassio.


This is the fruits of whoring. Prythe Aemilia,
Go know of Cassio where he supt to night.
What, do you shake at that?

He supt at my house, but I therefore shake not.


O did he so? I charge you go with me.


Oh fie upon thee Strumpet.


I am no Strumpet, but of life as honest,
As you that thus abuse me.

As I? Fie upon thee.


Kind Gentlemen:
Let Us go see poor Cassio dressed.
Come Mistress, you must tel's another Tale.
Aemilia, run you to the Cittadell,
And tell my Lord and Lady, what has happ'd:
Will you go on before? This is the night
That either makes me, or foredoes me quight.

It is the Cause, it is the Cause (my Soul)
Let me not name it to you, you chaste Stars,
It is the Cause. Yet I Will not shed her blood,
Nor scarre that whiter skin of hers, then Snow*
And smooth as Monumentall Alablaster:
Yet she must dye, else she will betray more men:
Put out the Light, and then put out the Light:
If I quench thee, thou flaming Minister,
I can again thy former light restore,
Should I repent me. But once put out thy Light,
Thou cunning'st Pattern of excelling Nature,
I know not where is that Promethae^ heat
That can thy Light re-Lume.
When I have plucked thy Rose,
I cannot give it vital growth again,
It needs must wither. I Will smell thee on the Tree.
Oh Balmy breath, that do almost persuade
Justice to break her Sword. One more, one more:
Be thus when thou art dead, and I will kill thee,
And love thee after. One more, and that is the last.
So sweet, was never so fatal. I must weep,
But they are cruel Tears: This sorrow's heavenly,
It strikes, where it does love. She wakes.

Who Is there? Othello?


I Desdemona.


Will you come to bed, my Lord?


Have you prayed to night, Desdemon?


I my Lord.


If you bethink your self of any Crime
Vnreconcil'd as yet to Heaven, and Grace,
Solicit for it straight.

Alack, my Lord,
What may you mean by that?

Well, do it, and be brief, I will walk by:
I would not kill thy unprepared Spirit,
No, Heavens fore-fend) I would not kill thy Soul.

Talk you of killing?


I, I do.


Then Heaven have mercy on me.


Amen, with all my heart.


If you say, I hope you will not kill me.


Humh.


And yet I fear you: for you're fatal then
When your eyes roll so.
Why I should fear, I know not,
Since guiltiness I know not: But yet I feel I fear.

Think on thy sins.


They are Loue^ I bear to you.


I, and for that thou dy'st.


That death's unnatural, that kills for loving.
Alas, why gnaw you so your nether-lip?
Some bloody passion shakes your very Frame:
These are portent^: but yet I hope, I hope,
They do not point on me.

Peace, and be still.


I will so: What Is the matter?


That Handkerchiefe
Which I so loved, and gave thee, thou gave to Cassio.

No by my Life, and Soul: send for the man,
And ask him.

Sweet Soul, take heed, take heed of Perjury,
Thou art on thy deathbed.

I, but not yet to dye.


Presently.
Therefore confess thee freely of thy sin:
For to deny each Article with Oath,
Cannot remove, nor choke the strong Conception
That I do groan withal. Thou art to dye.

O Heaven have mercy on me.


I say, Amen.


And have you mercy too. I never did
Offend you in my life: never loved Cassio,
But with such general warrantie of Heaven,
As I might love. I never gave him Token.

By Heaven I saw my Handkerchiefe in's hand.
O perjured woman, thou do stone my heart,
And makes me call, what I intend to do,
A Murder, which I thought a Sacrifice.
I saw the Handkerchiefe.

He found it then:
I never gave it him: Send, for him hither:
Let him confess a truth.

He has confessed.


What, my Lord?


That he has used thee.


How? unlawfully?


I.


He will not say so.


No: his mouth is stopped:
Honest Iago has 'tane order for it.

Oh, my fear interprets. What is he dead?


Had all his hairs bin lives, my great Revenge
Had stomach for them all.

Alas, he is betrayed, and I undone.


Out Strumpet: weep'st thou for him to my face?


O banish me, my Lord, but kill me not.


Down Strumpet.


Kill me to morrow, let me live to night.


Nay, if you strive.


But half an hour.


Being done, there is no pawse.


But while I say one prayer.


It is too late.


My Lord, my Lord? What hoa?
My Lord, my Lord.

What noise is this? Not dead? not yet quite dead?
I that am cruel, am yet merciful,
I would not have thee linger in thy pain?
So, so.

What hoa? my Lord, my Lord?


Who Is there?


Oh good my Lord, I would speak a word with you.


Yes: It Is Aemilia: by and by. She Is dead.
It Is like she comes to speak of Cassio's death:
The noise was high. Hah, no more moving?
Still as the Grave. Shall ^he come in? Were good?
I think she stirs again. No, what is best to do?
If she come in, she will sure speak to my wife:
My wife, my wife: what wife? I have no wife.
Oh insupportable! Oh heavy hour!
Me thinks, it should be now a huge Eclipse
Of Sun, and Moon; and that the affrighted Globe
Did yawne at Alteration.

I do beseech you
That I may speak with you. Oh good my Lord.

I had forgot thee: oh come in Aemilia.
Soft, by and by, let me the Curtains draw.
Where art thou? What Is the matter with thee now?

Oh my good Lord, yonder is foul Murders done.


What? now?


But now, my Lord.


It is the very error of the Moon,
She comes more nearer Earth then she was wont,
And makes men mad.

Cassio, my Lord, has killed
A young Venetian, called Rodorigo.

Rodorigo killed? and Cassio killed?


No* Cassio is not killed.


Not Cassio killed? Then Murther's out of tune,
And sweet Revenge grows harsh.

O falsely, falsely murdered.


Alas! what cry is that?


That? What?


Out, and alas, that was my Ladies voice.
Help, help hoa, help. Oh Lady speak again,
Sweet Desdemona, oh sweet Mistress, speak.

A guiltless death, I dye.


Oh who has done this deed?


No body: I my self, farewell:
Commend me to my kind Lord: oh farewell.

Why, how should she be murdered?


Alas: who knows?


You hear her say her self, it was not I.


She said so: I must needs report the truth.


She Is like a Liar gone to burning hell,
'Twas I that killed her.

Oh the more Angel she, and you the blacker Devil.


She turned to folly: and she was a whore.


Thou do belly her, and thou art a devil.


She wa^ false as water.


Thou a^t rash as fire, to say
That she was false. Oh she was heavenly true.

Cassio did top her: Ask thy husband else.
O, I were damned beneath all depth in hell:
But that I did proceed upon just grounds
To this extremity. Thy Husband knew it all.

My Husband?


Thy Husband.


That she was false to Wedlock?


I, with Cassio: had she bin true,
If Heaven would make me such another world,
Of one entyre and perfect Chrysolite,
I Would not have sold her for it.

My Husband?


I, 'twas he that told me on her first,
An honest man he is, and hates the slime
That sticks on filthy deeds.

My Husband?


What needs this itterance, Woman?
I say, thy Husband.

Oh Mistress,
Villainy has made mockes with love:
My Husband say she was false?

He, Woman;
I say thy Husband: Do understand the word?
My Friend, thy Husband; honest, honest Iago.

If he say so, may his pernicious Soul
Rot half a grain a day: he lies to' the heart,
She was too fond of her most filthy Bargain.

Hah?


Do thy worst:
This deed of thine is no more worthy Heaven,
Then thou was it worthy her.

Peace, you were best.


Thou have not half that power to do me harm,
As I have to be hurt. Oh Gull, oh dolt,
As ignorant as dirt: thou have done a deed
(I care not for thy Sword) I Will make thee known,
Though I lost twenty lives. Help, help, hoa, help:
The Moore has killed my Mistress. Murder, murder.

What is the matter? How now General?


Oh, are you come, Iago: you have done well,
That men must lay their Murders on your neck.

What is the matter?


Disprove this Villain, if thou be a man:
He says, thou told'st him that his wife was false:
I know thou did not: you are not such a Villain.
Speak, for my heart is full.

I told him what I thought,
And told no more
Then what he found himself was apt, and true.

But did you ever tell him,
She was false?

I did.


You ^old a Lie an odious damned Lie:
Upon my Soul, a Lie; a wicked Lie.
She false with Cassio?
Did you say with Cassio?

With Cassio, Mistress?
Go too, charm your tongue.

I will not charm my Tongue;
I am bound to speak,
My Mistress here lies murdered in her bed.

Oh Heavens, foresend.


And your reports have set the Murder on.


Nay stare not Masters,
It is true indeed.

It Is a strange Truth.


O monstrous Act.


Villainy, villainy, villainy:
I think upon it, I think: I smel't: O Villainy:
I thought so then: I Will kill my self for grief.
O villainy! villainy!

What, are you mad?
I charge you get you home.

Good Gentlemen, let me have leave to speak:
It Is proper I obey him; but not now:
Perchance Iago, I will never go home.

Oh, oh, oh.


Nay, lay thee down, and roar:
For thou have killed the sweetest innocent,
That ere did lift up eye.

Oh she was foul!
I scarce did know you Uncle, there lies your Niece,
Whose breath (indeed) these hands have newly stopped:
I know this act shows horrible and grim.

Poor Desdemon:
I am glad thy Father's dead,
Thy Match was mortal to him: and pure grief
Shore his old thread in twain. Did he live now,
This sight would make him do a desperate turn:
Yea, curse his better Angel from his side,
And fall to Reprobance.

It Is pitiful: but yet Iago knows
That she with Cassio, has the Act of shame*
A thousand times committed. Cassio confessed it,
And she did gratify his amorous works
With that Recognizance and pledge of Love
Which I first gave her: I saw it in his hand:
It was a Handkerchiefe, an Antique Token
My Father gave my Mother.

Oh Heaven! oh heavenly Powers!


Come, hold your peace.


'Twill out, 'twill out* I peace?
No, I will speak as liberal as the North;
Let Heaven, and Men, and Devils, let them all,
All, all, cry shame against me, yet I Will speak.

Be wise, and get you home.


I will not.


Fie, your Sword upon a Woman.


Oh thou dull Moore,
That Handkerchiefe thou speak of
I found by Fortune, and did give my Husband:
For often, with a solemn earnestness,
(More then indeed belonged to such a Trifle)
He begged of me, to steale't.

Villainous Whore.


She give it Cassio? No, alas I found it,
And I did giu't my Husband.

Filth, thou lie.


By Heaven I do not, I do not Gentlemen:
Oh murderous Coxcombe, what should such a Fool
Do with so good a wife?

Are there no stones in Heaven,
But what serves for the Thunder?
Precious Villain.

The woman falls:
Sure he has killed his Wife.

I, I: oh lay me by my Mistress side.


He Is gone, but his wife's killed.


It Is a notorious Villain: take you this weapon
Which I have recouer'd from the Moore:
Come guard the door without, let him not pass,
But kill him rather. I Will after that same villain,
For it is a damned Slave.

I am not valiant neither:
But every Punie whipster gets my Sword.
But why should Honor out-liue Honesty?
Let it go all.

What did thy Song boad Lady?
Hark, can thou hear me? I will play the Swan,
And dye in Music: Willough, Willough, Willough.
Moore, she was chaste: She loved thee, cruel Moore,
So come my Soul to bliss, as I speak true:
So speaking as I think, alas, I dye.

I have another weapon in this Chamber,
It was a Sword of Spain, the Ice brooks temper:
Oh here it is: Uncle I must come forth.

If thou attempt it, it will cost thee dear;
Thou have no weapon, and perforce must suffer.

Look in upon me then, and speak with me,
Or naked as I am I will assault thee.

What is the matter?


Behold, I have a weapon:
A better never did it self sustain
Upon a Soldiers Thigh. I have seen the day,
That with this little Arm, and this good Sword,
I have made my way through more impediments
Then twenty times your stop. But (oh vain boast)
Who can control his Fate? It Is not so now.
Be not afraid, though you do see me weapon'd:
Here is my iournies end, here is my butt
And very Sea-marke of my utmost Sail.
Do you go back dismayed? It Is a lost fear:
Man but a Rush against Othello's breast,
And he retires. Where should Othello go?
Now: how do thou look now? Oh ill-Starr'd wench,
Pale as thy Smock: when we shall meet at count,
This look of thine will hurl my Soul from Heaven,
And Fiends will snatch at it. Cold, cold, my Girl?
Even like thy Chastity. O cursed, cursed Slave!
Whip me ye Devils,
From the possession of this Heavenly sight:
Blow me about in winds, roast me in Sulphur,
Wash me in steepe-downe gulfes of Liquid fire.
Oh Desdemon! dead Desdemon: dead. Oh, oh!

Where is this rash, and most unfortunate man?


That Is he that was Othello: here I am.


Where is that Viper?
Bring the Villain forth.

I look down toward his feet; but that is a Fable,
If that thou be a Devil, I cannot kill thee.

Wrench his Sword from him.


I bleed Sir, but not killed.


I am not sorry neither, Il'd have thee live:
For in my sense, it is happiness to die.

Oh thou Othello, that was once so good,
Fallen in the practice of a cursed Slave,
What shall be said to thee.

Why any thing:
An honorable Murderer, if you will:
For naught I did in hate, but all in Honor.

This wretch has part confessed his Villainy:
Did you and he consent in Cassio's death.

I.


Dear General, I never gave you cause.


I do believe it, and I ask your pardon:
Will you, I pray, demand that demy-Diuell,
Why he has thus ensnared my Soul and Body.

Demand me nothing: what you know, you know:
From this time forth, I never will speak word.

What? not to pray?


Torments will open your lips.


Well, thou do best.


Sir,
You shall understand what has befalne,
(Which, as I think, you know not) here is a Letter
Found in the pocket of the slain Rodorigo,
And here another, the one of them imports
The death of Cassio, to be undertook
By Rodorigo.

O Villain!


Most Heathenish, and most gross.


Now, here is another discontented paper
Found in his pocket too: and this it seems
Rodorigo meant to have sent this damned villain:
But that (belike) Iago in the interim
Came in, and satisfied him.

Oh thou pernicious Caitiffe;
How came you (Cassio) by that Handkerchiefe
That was my wives?

I found it in my Chamber:
And he himself confessed it but even now,
That there he dropped it for a special purpose,
Which wrought to his desire.

O Fool, fool, fool!


There is besides, in Rodorigo's Letter,
How he vpbraides Iago, that he made him
Brave me upon the Watch: whereon it came
That I was cast: and even but now he spoke
(After long seeming dead) Iago hurt him,
Iago set him on.

You must forsake this room, and go with us:
Your Power, and your Command is taken off,
And Cassio rules in Cyprus. For this Slave,
If there be any cunning Cruelty,
That can torment him much, and hold him long,
It shall be his. You shall close Prisoner rest,
Till that the Nature of your fault be known
To the Venetian State. Come, bring away.

Soft you; a word or two before you go:
I have done the State some service, and they know it:
No more of that. I pray you in your Letters,
When you shall these unlucky deeds relate,
Speak of me, as I am. Nothing extenuate,
Nor set down ought in malice.
Then must you speak,
Of one that loved not wisely, but too well:
Of one, not easily Iealious, but being wrought,
Perplexed in the extreme: Of one, whose hand
(Like the base Iudean) threw a Pearl away
Richer then all his Tribe: Of one, whose subdued Eyes,
Albeit vn-vsed to the melting mood,
Drops tears as fast as the Arabian Trees
Their Medicinable gum. Set you down this:
And say besides, that in Aleppo once,
Where a malignant, and a Turbond-Turke
Beat a Venetian, and traduced the State,
I took by the throat the circumcised Dog,
And smoate him, thus.

Oh bloody period.


All that is spoke, is marred.


I kissed thee, ere I killed thee: No way but this,
Killing my self, to dye upon a kiss.

This did I fear, but thought he had no weapon:
For he was great of heart.

Oh Sparton Dog:
More fell then Anguish, Hunger, or the Sea:
Look on the Tragic Loading of this bed:
This is thy work:
The Object poisons Sight,
Let it be hid. Gratiano, keep the house,
And seize upon the Fortunes of the Moore,
For they succeed on you. To you, Lord Governor,
Remains the Censure of this hellish villain:
The Time, the Place, the Torture, oh enforce it:
My self will straight aboard, and to the State,
This heavy Act, with heavy heart relate.


