GRegory: A my word we will not carry coals.


No, for then we should be Colliars.


I mean, if we be in choler, we will draw.


I, While you live, draw your neck out of th Collar.


I strike quickly, being moved.


But thou art not quickly moved to strike.


A dog of the house of Mountague, moves me.


To move, is to stir: and to be valiant, is to stand:
Therefore, if thou art moved, thou runst away.

A dog of that house shall move me to stand.
I will take the wall of any Man or Maid of Mountagues.

That shows thee a weak slave, for the weakest goes to the wall.


True, and therefore women being the weaker Vessels, are ever thrust to the
wall: therefore I will push Mountagues men from the wall, and thrust his Maids
to the wall


The Quarrel is between our Masters, and us their men.


It Is all one, I will show my self a tyrant: when I have fought with the men,
I will be civil with the Maids, and cut off their heads


The heads of the Maids?


I, the heads of the Maids, or their Maiden-heads,
Take it in what sense thou will.

They must take it sense, that feel it*


Me they shall feel while I am able to stand:
And it is known I am a pretty piece of flesh.

It Is well thou art not Fish: If thou had, thou had been poor John.
Draw thy Tool, here comes of the House of the Mountagues


My naked weapon is out: quarrel, I will back thee


How? Turn thy back, and run.


Fear me not.


No marry: I fear thee.


Let us take the Law of our sides* let them begin.


I will frown as I pass by, and let the^ take it as they list


Nay, as they dare. I will bite my Thumb at them, which is a disgrace to them,
if they bear it


Do you bite your Thumb at us sir?


I do bite my Thumb, sir.


Do you bite your Thumb at us, sir?


Is the Law of our side, if I say I?


No.


No sir, I do not bite my Thumb at you sir: but I bite my Thumb sir.


Do you quarrel sir?


Quarrel sir? no sir.


If you do sir, I am for you, I serve as good a man as you


No better?


Well sir.


Say better: here comes one of my masters kinsmen.


Yes, better.


You Lie.


Draw if you be men. Gregory, remember thy washing blow.


Part Fools, put up your Swords, you know not what you do.


What art thou drawn, among these heartlesse Hindes? Turn thee Benuolio,
look upon thy death


I do but keep the peace, put up thy Sword,
Or manage it to part these men with me.

What draw, and talk of peace? I hate the word
As I hate hell, all Mountagues, and thee:
Have at thee Coward.

Clubs, Bills, and Partisons, strike, beat them down
Down with the Capulets, down with the Mountagues.

What noise is this? Give me my long Sword ho.


A crutch, a crutch: why call you for a Sword?


My Sword I say: Old Mountague is come,
And flourishes his Blade in spite of me.

Thou villain* Capulet. Hold me not, let me go


Thou shall not stir a foot to seek a Foe.


Rebellious Subjects, Enemies to peace,
Prophaners of this Neighbor-stained Steel,
Will they not hear? What hoe, you Men, you Beasts,
That quench the fire of your pernicious Rage,
With purple Fountains issuing from your Veins:
On pain of Torture, from those bloody hands
Throw your mistemper'd Weapons to the ground,
And hear the Sentence of your moved Prince.
Three civil Broils, bred of an Ayery word,
By thee old Capulet and Mountague,
Have thrice disturbed the quiet of our streets,
And made Verona's ancient Citizens
Cast by their Grave beseeming Ornaments,
To wield old Partisans, in hands as old,
Cankred with peace, to part your Cankred hate,
If ever you disturb our streets again,
Your lives shall pay the forfeit of the peace.
For this time all the rest depart away:
You Capulet shall go along with me,
And Mountague come you this afternoon,
To know our Fathers pleasure in this case:
To old Free-towne, our common judgment place:
Once more on pain of death, all men depart.

Who set this ancient quarrel new abroach?
Speak Nephew, were you by, when it began:

Here were the servants of your adversary,
And yours close fighting ere I did approach,
I drew to part them, in the instant came
The fiery Tibalt, with his sword prepared,
Which as he breathed defiance to my ears,
He swong about his head, and cut the winds,
Who nothing hurt withal, hist him in scorn.
While we were enterchanging thrusts and blows,
Came more and more, and fought on part and part,
Till the Prince came, who parted either part.

O where is Romeo, saw you him to day?
Right glad am I, he was not at this fray.

Madam, an hour before the worshipped Sun
Peer'd forth the golden window of the East,
A troubled mind drove me to walk abroad,
Where underneath the grove of Sycamour,
That Westward rooteth from this City side:
So early walking did I see your Son:
Toward him I made, but he was ware of me,
And stole into the covert of the wood,
I measuring his affections by my own,
Which then most sought, where most might not be found:
Being one too many by my weary self,
Pursued my Honor, not pursuing his
And gladly shunned, who gladly fled from me.

Many a morning has he there been seen,
With tears augmenting the fresh mornings deaw,
Adding to clouds, more clouds with his deep sighs,
But all so soon as the all-cheering Sun,
Should in the farthest East begin to draw
The shadie Curtains from Auroras bed,
Away from light-steales home my heavy Son,
And private in his Chamber pens himself,
Shuts up his windows, locks fair daylight out,
And makes himself an artificial night:
Black and portendous must this humor prove,
Unless good counsel may the cause remove.

My Noble Uncle do you know the cause?


I neither know it, nor can learn of him.


Have you importuned him by any means?


Both by my self and many others Friends,
But he his own affections counselor,
Is to himself (I will not say how true)
But to himself so secret and so close,
So far from sounding and discovery,
As is the bud bit with an envious worm,
Ere he can spread his sweet leaves to the air,
Or dedicate his beauty to the same.
Could we but learn from whence his sorrows grow,
We would as willingly give cure, as know.

See where he comes, so please you step aside,
I Will know his greeuance, or be much denide.

I would thou were so happy by thy stay,
To hear true shrift. Come Madam let us away.

Good morrow Cousin.


Is the day so young?


But new struck nine.


Aye me, sad hours seem long:
Was that my Father that went henec so fast?

It was: what sadness lengthens Romeo's hours?

Not having that, which having, makes them short


In love.


Out.


Of love.


Out of her favor where I am in love.


Alas that love so gentle in his view,
Should be so tyrannous and rough in proof.

Alas that love, whose view is muffled still,
Should without eyes, see path-wayes to his will:
Where shall we dine? O me: what fray was here?
Yet tell me not, for I have heard it all:
Here Is much to do with hate, but more with love:
Why then, O brawling love, O loving hate,
O any thing, of nothing first created:
O heavy lightness, serious vanity,
Misshapen Chaos of welseeing forms,
Feather of lead, bright smoke, cold fire, sick health,
Still waking sleep, that is not what it is:
This love feel I, that feel no love in this.
Do thou not laugh?

No Coze, I rather weep.


Good heart, at what?


At thy good hearts oppression.


Why such is loves transgression.
Griefs of mine own lie heavy in my breast,
Which thou will propagate to have it preast
With more of thine, this love that thou have shown,
Does add more grief, to too much of mine own.
Love, is a smoke made with the fume of sighs,
Being purged, a fire sparkling in Lovers eyes,
Being vexed, a Sea nourisht with loving tears,
What is it else? a madness, most discreet,
A choking gall, and a preserving sweet:
Farewell my Coze.

Soft I will go along.
And if you leave me so, you do me wrong.

Tut I have lost my self, I am not here,
This is not Romeo, he is some other where.

Tell me in sadness, who is that you love?


What shall I groan and tell thee?


Groan, why no: but sadly tell me who.


A sick man in sadness makes his will:
A word ill urged to one that is so ill:
In sadness Cousin, I do love a woman.

I aimed so near, when I supposed you loved.


A right good mark man, and she is fair I love


A right fair mark, fair Coze, is soonest hit.


Well in that hit you miss, she will not be hit
With Cupids arrow, she has Dians wit:
And in strong proof of chastity well armed:
From loves weak childish Bow, she lives vncharm'd.
She will not stay the siege of loving terms,
Nor bid the encounter of assailing eyes.
Nor open her lap to Sainct-seducing Gold:
O she is rich in beauty, only poor,
That when she dies, with beauty dies her store.

Then she has sworn, that she will still live chaste?

She has, and in that sparing make huge wast?
For beauty steru'd with her severity,
Cuts beauty off from all posterity.
She is too fair, too wisewi: sely too fair,
To merit bliss by making me despair:
She has forsworn to love, and in that vow
Do I live dead, that live to tell it now.

Be ruled by me, forget to think of her.


O teach me how I should forget to think.


By giving liberty unto thine eyes,
Examine other beauties,

It Is the way to call hers (exquisit) in question more,
These happy maskes that kiss fair Ladies brows,
Being black, puts us in mind they hide the fair:
He that is strooken blind, cannot forget
The precious treasure of his eyesight lost:
Show me a Mistress that is passing fair,
What does her beauty serve but as a note,
Where I may read who past that passing fair.
Farewell thou can not teach me to forget,

I Will pay that doctrine, or else die in debt.


Mountague is bound as well as I,
In penalty alike, and it is not hard I think,
For men so old as we, to keep the peace.

Of Honorable reckoning are you both,
And pity it is you lived at ods so long:
But now my Lord, what say you to my suit?

But saying ore what I have said before,
My Child is yet a stranger in the world,
She has not seen the change of fourteen years,
Let two more Summers wither in their pride,
Ere we may think her ripe to be a Bride.

Younger then she, are happy mothers made.


And too soon marred are those so early made:
Earth has swallowed all my hopes but she,
She Is the hopeful Lady of my earth:
But woo her gentle Paris, get her heart,
My will to her consent, is but a part,
And she agree, within her scope of choice,
Lies my consent, and fair according voice:
This night I hold an old accustomed Feast,
Whereto I have invited many a Guest,
Such as I love, and you among the store,
One more, most welcome makes my number more:
At my poor house, look to behold this night,
Earth-treading stars, that make dark heaven light,
Such comfort as do lusty young men feel,
When well apparrel'd April on the heel
Of limping Winter treads, even such delight
Among fresh Fennel buds shall you this night
Inherit at my house: hear all, all see:
And like her most, whose merit most shall be:
Which one more veiw, of many, mine being one,
May stand in number, though in reckning none.
Come, go with me: go sirrah trudge about,
Through fair Verona, find those persons out,
Whose names are written there, and to them say,
My house and welcome, on their pleasure stay.

Find them out whose names are written. Here it is written, that the
Shoo-maker should meddle with his Yard, and the Tailor with his Last, the
Fisher with his Pensill, and the Painter with his Nets. But I am sent to find
those persons whose names are writ, and can never find what names the writing
person has here writ (I must to the learned) in good time


Tut man, one fire burns out another burning,
One pai^e is lesned by another anguish:
Turn giddie, and be help by backward turning:
One desparate grief, cures with another languish:
Take thou some new infection to the eye,
And the rank poison of the old will die.

Your Plantan leaf is excellent for that.


For what I pray thee?


For your broken shin.


Why Romeo art thou mad?


Not mad, but bound more then a mad man is:
Shut up in prison, kept without my food,
Whipped and tormented: and Godden good fellow,

Godgigoden, I pray sir can you read?


I mine own fortune in my misery.


Perhaps you have learned it without book:
But I pray can you read any thing you see?

I, if I know the Letters and the Language.


Ye say honestly, rest you merry.


Stay fellow, I can read.
SEigneur Martino, and his wife and daughter: County Ans:elm and his beauteous
sisters: the Lady widow of Vtruuio, Seigneur Placentio, and his lovely Neeces:
Mercutio and his brother Valentine: mine uncle Capulet his wife and daughters:
my fair Niece Rosaline, Liuia, Seigneur Valentio, and his Cosen Tybalt: Lucio
and the lively Helena. A fair assembly, whither should they come

Up.


Whither? to supper?


To our house.


Whose house?


My Masters.


Indeed I should have asked you that before.


Now I Will tell you without asking. My master is the great rich Capulet, and if
you be not of the house of Mountagues I pray come and crush a cup of wine. Rest
you merry


At this same ancient Feast of Capulets
Sups the fair Rosaline, whom thou so loves:
With all the admired Beauties of Verona,
Go thither and with unattained eye,
Compare her face with some that I shall show,
And I will make thee think thy Swan a Crow.

When the devout religion of mine eye
Maintains such falsehood, then turn tears to fire:
And these who often drowned could never die,
Transparent Heretics be burnt for liers.
One fairer then my love: the all-seeing Sun
Nere saw her match, since first the world begun.

Tut, you saw her fair, none else being by,
Herself poys'd with herself in either eye:
But in that Crystal scales, let there be waid,
Your Ladies love against some other Maid
That I will show you, shining at this Feast,
And she show scant shell, well, that now shows best.

I Will go along, no such sight to be shown,
But to rejoice in splendour of mine own.

Nurse where is my daughter? call her forth to me.


Now by my Maidenhead, at twelve year old
I bad her come, what Lamb: what Ladi-bird, God forbid,
Where Is this Girl? what Juliet?

How now, who calls?


Your Mother.


Madam I am here, what is your will?


This is the matter: Nurse give leave awhile, we must talk in secret. Nurse
come back again, I have remembered me, thou'se hear our counsel. Thou
know my daughter's of a pretty age


Faith I can tell her age unto an hour.


She Is not fourteen.


I Will lay fourteen of my teeth,
And yet to my teene be it spoken,
I have but four, she is not fourteen.
How long is it now to Lammas tide?

A fortnight and odd days.


Even or odd, of all days in the year come Lammas Eve at night shall she be
fourteen. Susan and she, God rest all Christian souls, were of an age. Well
Susan is with God, she was too good for me. But as I said, on Lamas Eve at
night shall she be fourteen, that shall she marie, I remember it well. It Is
since the Earthquake now eleven years, and she was weaned I never shall
forget it, of all the days of the year, upon that day: for I had then laid
Worme-wood to my Dug sitting in the Sun under the Douehouse wall, my Lord and
you were then at Mantua, nay I do bear a brain. But as I said, when it did
taste the Worme-wood on the nipple of my Dugge, and felt it bitter, pretty
fool, to see it teachie, and fall out with the Dugge, Shake quoth the
Doue-house, 'twas no need I trow to bid me trudge: and since that time it is
a eleven years, for then she could stand alone, nay bi' the roode she could
have run, and wadled all about: for even the day before she broke her brow,
and then my Husband God be with his soul, a was a merry man, took up the
Child, yea quoth he, do thou fall upon thy face? thou will fall backward
when thou have more wit, will thou not Iule? And by my holy-dam, the pretty
wretch left crying, and said I: to see now how a Jest shall come about. I
warrant, and I shall live a thousand years, I never should forget it: will thou not Iulet quoth he? and pretty fool it stinted, and said I


Enough of this, I pray thee hold thy peace.


Yes Madam, yet I cannot choose but laugh, to think it should leave crying, and
say I: and yet I warrant it had upon it brow, a bumpe as big as a young
Cockrels stone? A perilous knock, and it cried bitterly. Yea quoth my husband,
fall'st upon thy face, thou will fall backward when thou come to age: will thou not Iule? It stinted: and said I


And stint thou too. I pray thee Nurse, say I.


Peace I have done: God mark thee too his grace thou wast the prettiest Babe
that ere I nursed, and I might live to see thee married once, I have my wish


Marry that marry is the very theme
I came to talk of, tell me daughter Juliet,
How stands your disposition to be Married?

It is an hour that I dream not of.


An hour, were not I thine only Nurse, I would say thou had sucked wisdom
from thy teat


Well think of marriage now, younger then you
Here in Verona, Ladies of esteem,
Are made already Mothers. By my count
I was your Mother, much upon these years
That you are now a Maid, thus then in brief:
The valiant Paris seeks you for his love.

A man young Lady, Lady, such a man as all the world. Why he is a man of wax.


Veronas Summer has not such a flower.


Nay he is a flower, infaith a very flower.


What say you, can you love the Gentleman?
This night you shall behold him at our Feast,
Read ore the volume of young Paris face,
And find delight, writ there with Beauties pen:
Examine every several liniament,
And see how one another lends content:
And what obscured in this fair volume lies,
Find written in the Margent of his eyes*
This precious Book of Love, this unbound Lover,
To Beautify him, only lacks a Cover.
The fish lives in the Sea, and it is much pride
For fair without, the fair within to hide:
That Book in manies eyes does share the glory,
That in Gold claspes, Locks in the Golden story:
So shall you share all that he does possess,
By having him, making your self no less.

No less, nay bigger: women grow by men.


Speak briefly, can you like of Paris love?


I Will look to like, if looking liking move.
But no more deep will I endart mine eye,
Then your consent gives strength to make fly.

Madam, the guests are come, supper served up, you called, my young Lady asked
for, the Nurse cur'st in the Pantery, and every thing in extremity: I must
hence to wait, I beseech you follow straight


We follow thee, Juliet, the County stays.


Go Gyrle, seek happ^e nights to happy days.


What shall this speeh be spoke for our excuse?
Or shall we on without Apology?

The date is out of such prolixitie,
We Will have no Cupid, hood winkt with a skarfe,
Bearing a Tartars painted Bow of lath,
Skaring the Ladies like a Crow-keeper.
But let them measure us by what they will,
We Will measure them a Measure, and be gone.

Give me a Torch, I am not for this ambling.
Being but heavy I will bear the light.

Nay gentle Romeo, we must have you dance.


Not I believe me, you have dancing shoes
With nimble soles, I have a soale of Lead
So stakes me to the ground, I cannot move.

You are a Lover, borrow Cupids wings,
And soar with them above a common bound.

I am too sore enpearced with his shaft,
To soar with his light feathers, and to bound:
I cannot bound a pitch above dull woe,
Under loves heavy burden do I sink.

And to sink in it should you burden love,
Too great oppression for a tender thing.

Is love a tender thing? it is too rough,
Too rude, too boisterous, and it pricks like thorn.

If love be rough with you, be rough with love,
Prick love for pricking, and you beat love down,
Give me a Case to put my visage in,
A Visor for a Visor, what care I
What curious eye does quote deformities:
Here are the Beetle-browes shall blush for me.

Come knock and enter, and no sooner in,
But every man betake him to his legs.

A Torch for me, let wantons light of heart
Tickle the senseless rushes with their heels:
For I am prouerb'd with a Grandsier Phrase,
I Will be a Candle-holder and look on,
The game was nere so fair, and I am done.

Tut, duns the Mouse, the Constables own word,
If thou art dun, we will draw thee from the mire.
Or save your reverence love, wherein thou stickest
Up to the ears, come we burn daylight ho.

Nay that is not so.


I mean sir I delay,
We wast our lights in vain, lights, lights, by day;
Take our good meaning, for our Judgment sits
Five times in that, ere once in our fine wits.

And we mean well in going to this Mask,
But it is no wit to go.

Why may one ask?


I dreampt a dream to night.


And so did I.


Well what was yours?


That dreamers often lie.


In bed a sleep while they do dream things true.


O then I see Queen Mab has been with you: She is the Fairies Midwife, and
she comes in shape no bigger then Agat-stone, on the forefinger of an
Alderman, drawn with a teeme of little Atomies, over men's noses as they lie
asleep: her Wagon Spokes made of long Spinners legs: the Cover of the wings
of Grasshoppers, her Traces of the smallest Spiders web, her coullers of the
Moonshines watery Beams, her Whip of Crickets bone, the Lash of Philome, her
Waggoner, a small gray-coated Gnat, not half so big as a round little Worm,
pricked from the Lazie-finger of a man. Her Chariot is an empty Haselnut, made
by the Ioyner Squirrel or old Grub, time out a mind, the Faries Coach-makers:
and in this state she gallops night by night, through Lovers brains: and then
they dream of Love. On Courtiers knees, that dream on Cursies strait: ore
Lawyers fingers, who strait dreamt on Fees, ore Ladies lips, who strait on
kisses dream, which often athe angry Mab with blisters plagues, because their
breath with Sweet meats tainted are. Sometime she gallops ore a Courtiers nose,
and then dreams he of smelling out asute: and sometime comes she with Tith pigs
tale, tickling a Parsons nose as a lies asleep, then he dreams of another
Benefice. Sometime she drives ore a Soldiers neck, and then dreams he of
cutting Foreign throats, of Breaches, Ambuscados, Spanish Blades: Of Healths
five Fadome deep, and then anon drums in his ears, at which he startes and
wakes; and being thus frighted, swears a prayer or two and sleeps again:
this is that very Mab that plats the manes of Horses in the night: and bakes
the Elk-locks in foul sluttish hairs, which once vntangled, much misfortune
bodes

This is the hag, when Maids lie on their backs,
That presses them, and learnes them first to bear,
Making them women of good carriage:
This is she.

Peace, peace, Mercutio peace,
Thou talk of nothing.

True, I talk of dreams:
Which are the children of an idle brain,
Begot of nothing, but vain fantasy,
Which is as thin of substance as the air,
And more inconstant then the wind, who wooes
Even now the frozen bosom of the North:
And being angered, puffes away from thence,
Turning his side to the dew dropping South.

This wind you talk of blows us from our selves,
Supper is done, and we shall come too late.

I fear too early, for my mind misgiues,
Some consequence yet hanging in the stars,
Shall bitterly begin his fearful date
With this nights revels, and expire the term
Of a despised life closed in my breast:
By some vile forfeit of untimely death*
But he that has the stirrage of my course,
Direct my suit: on lusty Gentlemen.

Strike Drum.


Where Is Potpan, that he helps not to take away?
He shift a Trencher? he scrape a Trencher?

When good manners, shall lie in one or two men's hands, and they unwashed too,
it is a foul thing


Away with the Ioynstooles, remove the Courtcubbord, look to the Plate: good
thou, save me a piece of Marchpane, and as thou love me, let the Porter let
in Susan Grindstone, and Nell, Anthony and Potpan


I Boy ready.


You are looked for, and called for, asked for, and sought for, in the great
Chamber


We cannot be here and there too, chearly Boys,
Be brisk awhile, and the longer liver take all.

Welcome Gentlemen,
Ladies that have their toes
Vnplagu'd with Corns, will walk about with you:
Ah my Mistresses, which of you all
Will now deny to dance? She that makes dainty,
She I Will swear has Corns: am I come near ye now?
Welcome Gentlemen, I have seen the day
That I have worn a Visor, and could tell
A whispering tale in a fair Ladies ear:
Such as would please: it is gone, it is gone, it is gone,
You are welcome Gentlemen, come Musicians play:
A Hall, Hall, give room, and foot it Girls,
More light you knaves, and turn the Tables up:
And quench the fire, the Room is grown too hot.
Ah sirrah, this unlooked for sport comes well:
Nay sit, nay sit, good Cousin Capulet,
For you and I are past our dancing days:
How long 'ist now since last your self and I
Were in a Mask?

Berlady thirty years.


What man: it is not so much, it is not so much,
It Is since the Nuptial of Lucentio,
Come Pentycost as quickly as it will,
Some five and twenty years, and then we Maskt.

It Is more, it is more, his Son is elder sir:
His Son is thirty.

Will you tell me that?
His Son was but a Ward two years ago.

What Lady is that which dothni rich the hand
Of yonder Knight?

I know not sir.


O she does teach the Torches to burn bright:
It seems she hangs upon the cheek of night,
As a rich Jewel in an Aethiops ear:
Beauty too rich for use, for earth too dear:
So shows a Snowy Dove trooping with Crows,
As yonder Lady ore her fellows shows;
The measure done, I Will watch her place of stand,
And touching hers, make blessed my rude hand.
Did my heart love till now, forswear it sight,
For I never saw true Beauty till this night.

This by his voice, should be a Mountague.
Fetch me my Rapier Boy, what dares the slave
Come hither covered with an antique face,
To fleere and scorn at our Solemnity?
Now by the stock and Honor of my kin,
To strike him dead I hold it not a sin.

Why how now kinsman,
Wherefore storm you so?

Uncle this is a Mountague, our foe:
A Villain that is hither come in spite,
To scorn at our Solemnity this night.

Young Romeo is it?


It Is he, that Villain Romeo.


Content thee gentle Coz, let him alone,
A bears him like a portly Gentleman:
And to say truth, Verona brags of him,
To be a virtuous and well governed youth:
I would not for the wealth of all the town,
Here in my house do him disparagement:
Therefore be patient, take no note of him,
It is my will, the which if thou respect,
Show a fair presence, and put off these frowns,
An ill beseeming semblance for a Feast.

It fits when such a Villain is a guest,
I Will not endure him.

He shall be endu'rd.
What goodman boy, I say he shall, go too,
Am I the Master here or you? go too,
You Will not endure him, God shall mend my soul,
You Will make a Mutiny among the Guests:
You will set cock a hoope, you will be the man.

Why Uncle, it is a shame.


Go too, go too,
You are a saucy Boy, 'ist so indeed?
This trick may chance to scath you, I know what,
You must contrary me, marry it is time.
Well said my hearts, you are a Princox, go,
Be quiet, or more light, more light for shame,
I Will make you quiet. What, chearely my hearts.

Patience perforce, with wilful choler meeting,
Makes my flesh tremble in their different greeting:
I will withdraw, but this intrusion shall
Now seeming sweet, convert to bitter gall.

If I profane with my unworthiest hand,
This holy shrine, the gentle sin is this,
My lips to blushing Pilgrims did ready stand,
To smooth that rough touch, with a tender kiss.

Good Pilgrim,
You do wrong your hand too much.
Which mannerly devotion shows in this,
For Saints have hands, that Pilgrims hands do tuch,
And palm to palm, is holy Palmers kiss.

Have not Saints lips, and holy Palmers too?


I Pilgrim, lips that they must use in prayer.


O then dear Saint, let lips do what hands do,
They pray (grant thou) least faith turn to despair.

Saints do not move,
Though grant for prayers sake.

Then move not while my prayers effect I take:
Thus from my lips, by thine my sin is purged.

Then have my lips the sin that they have took.


Sin from my lips? O trespass sweetly urged:
Give me my sin again.

You kiss by' the book.


Madam your Mother craves a word with you.


What is her Mother?


Marry Batcheler,
Her Mother is the Lady of the house,
And a good Lady, and a wise, and Virtuous,
I Nur'st her Daughter that you talked withal:
I tell you, he that can lay hold of her,
Shall have the chincks.

Is she a Capulet?
O dear account! My life is my foes debt.

Away, be gone, the sport is at the best.


I so I fear, the more is my unrest.


Nay Gentlemen prepare not to be gone,
We have a trifling foolish Banquet toward:
Is it e'ne so? why then I thank you all.
I thank you honest Gentlemen, good night:
More Torches here: come on, then let us to bed.
Ah sirrah, by my faie it waxes late,
I Will to my rest.

Come hither Nurse,
What is yond Gentleman:

The Son and Heir of old Tyberio.


What Is he that now is going out of door?


Marry that I think be young Petruchio.


What Is he that follows here that would not dance?


I know not.


Go ask his name: if he be married,
My grave is like to be my wedded bed.

His name is Romeo, and a Mountague,
The only Son of your great Enemy.

My only Love sprung from my only hate,
Too early seen, unknown, and known too late,
Prodigious birth of Love it is to me,
That I must love a loathed Enemy.

What Is this? what is this?


A rhyme, I learn even now
Of one I dan'st withal.

Anon, anon:
Come let us away, the strangers all are gone.
Now old desire does in his death bed lie,
And young affection gapes to be his Heir,
That fair, for which Love gron'd for and would die,
With tender Juliet matched, is now not fair.
Now Romeo is beloved, and Loves again,
A like bewitched by the charm of looks:
But to his foe supposed he must complain,
And she steal Loves sweet bait from fearful hooks:
Being held a foe, he may not have access
To breath such vows as Lovers use to swear,
And she as much in Love, her means much less,
To meet her new Beloved any where:
But passion lends them Power, time, means to meet,
Temp'ring extremities with extreme sweet.

Can I go forward when my heart is here?
Turn back dull earth, and find thy Center out.

Romeo, my Cozen Romeo, Romeo.


He is wise,
And on my life has stolen him home to bed.

He ran this way and leapt this Orchard wall.
Call good Mercutio:
Nay, I Will conjure too.

Romeo, Humors, Madman, Passion, Lover,
Appear thou in the likeness of a sigh,
Speak but one rhyme, and I am satisfied:
Cry me but ay me, Prouant, but Love and day,
Speak to my goship Venus one fair word,
One Nickname for her purblind Son and her,
Young Abraham Cupid he that shot so true,
When King Cophet^a loved the beggar Maid,
He hears not, he stirs not, he moves not,
The Ape is dead, I must conjure him,
I conjure thee by Rosalines bright eyes,
By her High forehead, and her Scarlet lip,
By her Fine foot, Straight leg, and Quiuering thigh,
And the Demeanes, that there Adjacent lie,
That in thy likeness thou appear to us.

And if he hear thee thou will anger him.


This cannot anger him, to would anger him
To raise a spirit in his Mistress circle,
Of some strange nature, letting it stand
Till she had laid it, and coniured it down,
That were some spite.
My invocation is fair and honest, and in his Mistress name,
I conjure only but to raise up him.

Come, he has hid himself among these Trees
To be consorted with the Humerous night:
Blind is his Love, and best befits the dark.

If Love be blind, Love cannot hit the mark,
Now will he sit under a Medler tree,
And wish his Mistress were that kind of Fruit,
As Maids call Medlers when they laugh alone,
O Romeo that she were, O that she were
An open, or thou a Poprin Pear,
Romeo goodnight, I Will to my Truckle bed,
This Field-bed is to cold for me to sleep,
Come shall we go?

Go then, for it is in vain to seek him here
That means not to be found.

He ieasts at Scarres that never felt a wound,
But soft, what light through yonder window breaks?
It is the East, and Juliet is the Sun,
Arise fair Sun and kill the envious Moon,
Who is already sick and pale with grief,
That thou her Maid art far more fair then she:
Be not her Maid since she is envious,
Her Vestal livery is but sick and green,
And none but fools do wear it, cast it off:
It is my Lady, O it is my Love, O that she knew she were,
She speaks, yet she says nothing, what of that?
Her eye discourses, I will answer it:
I am too bold it is not to me she speaks:
Two of the fairest stars in all the Heaven,
Having some business do entreat her eyes,
To twinckle in their Spheres till they return.
What if her eyes were there, they in her head,
The brightness of her cheek would shame those stars,
As daylight does a Lamp, her eye in heaven,
Would through the ayrie Region stream so bright,
That Birds would sing, and think it were not night:
See how she leanes her cheek upon her hand.
O that I were a Glove upon that hand,
That I might touch that cheek.

Ay me.


She speaks.
Oh speak again bright Angel, for thou art
As glorious to this night being ore my head,
As is a winged messenger of heaven
Unto the white vpturned wondering eyes
Of mortals that fall back to gaze on him,
When he bestrides the lazy puffing Clouds,
And sails upon the bosom of the air.

O Romeo, Romeo, wherefore art thou Romeo?
Deny thy Father and refuse thy name:
Or if thou will not, be but sworn my Love,
And I Will no longer be a Capulet.

Shall I hear more, or shall I speak at this?


It Is but thy name that is my Enemy:
Thou art thy self, though not a Mountague,
What Is Mountague? it is nor hand nor foot,
Nor arm, nor face, O be some other name
Belonging to a man.
What? in a names that which we call a Rose,
By any other word would smell as sweet,
So Romeo would, were he not Romeo called,
Retain that dear perfection which he owes,
Without that title Romeo, doffe thy name,
And for thy name which is no part of thee,
Take all my self.

I take thee at thy word:
Call me but Love, and I Will be new baptized,
Hence forth I never will be Romeo.

What man art thou, that thus bescreen'd in night
So stumblest on my counsel?

By a name,
I know not how to tell thee who I am:
My name dear Saint, is hateful to my self,
Because it is an Enemy to thee,
Had I it written, I would tear the word.

My ears have yet not drunk a hundred words
Of thy tongues uttering, yet I know the sound.
Art thou not Romeo, and a Montague?

Neither fair Maid, if either thee dislike.


How came thou hither.
Tell me, and wherefore?
The Orchard walls are high, and hard to climb,
And the place death, considering who thou art,
If any of my kinsmen find thee here,

With Loves light wings
Did I ore-perch these Walls,
For stony limits cannot hold Love out,
And what Love can do, that dares Love attempt:
Therefore thy kinsmen are no stop to me.

If they do see thee, they will murder thee.


Alack there lies more peril in thine eye,
Then twenty of their Swords, look thou but sweet,
And I am proof against their enmity.

I would not for the world they saw thee here.


I have nights cloak to hide me from their eyes
And but thou love me, let them find me here,
My life were better ended by their hate,
Then death proroged wanting of thy Love.

By whose direction found'st thou out this place?


By Love that first did promp me to enquire,
He lent me counsel, and I lent him eyes,
I am no Pylot, yet were thou as far
As that vast-shore-washet with the farthest Sea,
I should adventure for such Merchandise.

Thou know the mask of night is on my face,
Else would a Maiden blush be paint my cheek,
For that which thou have heard me speak to night,
Feign would I dwell on form, feign, feign, deny
What I have spoke, but farewell Complement,
Do thou Love? I know thou will say I,
And I will take thy word, yet if thou swear'st,
Thou may prove false: at Lovers periuries
They say Jove laughed, oh gentle Romeo,
If thou do Love, pronounce it faithfully:
Or if thou think I am too quickly won,
I Will frown and be perverse, and say thee nay,
So thou will woo: But else not for the world.
In truth saire Mountague I am too fond:
And therefore thou may think my behavior light,
But trust me Gentleman, I Will prove more true,
Then those that have coying to be strange,
I should have been more strange, I must confess,
But that thou over heard'st ere I was ware
My true Loves passion, therefore pardon me,
And not impute this yielding to light Love,
Which the dark night has so discovered.

Lady, by yonder Moon I vow,
That tips with silver all these Fruit ^ree tops.

O swear not by the Moon, the inconstant Moon,
That monthly changes in her circled Orb,
Least that thy Love prove likewise variable.

What shall I swear by?

Do not swear at all:
Or if thou will swear by thy gracious self,
Which is the God of my Idolatry,
And I Will believe thee.

If my hearts dear love.


Well do not swear, although I joy in thee:
I have no joy of this contract to night,
It is too rash, too vnaduis'd, too sudden,
Too like the lightning which does cease to be
Ere, one can say, it lightens, Sweet good night:
This bud of Love by Summers ripening breath,
May prove a beauteous Flower when next we meet:
Goodnight, goodnight, as sweet repose and rest,
Come to thy heart, as that within my breast.

O will thou leave me so unsatisfied?


What satisfaction can thou have to night?

The exchange of thy Loves faithful vow for mine.


I gave thee mine before thou did request it:
And yet I would it were to give again.

Would thou withdraw it,
For what purpose Love?

But to be frank and give it thee again,
And yet I wish but for the thing I have,
My bounty is as boundless as the Sea,
My Love as deep, the more I give to thee
The more I have, for both are Infinite:
I hear some noise within dear Love adue:
Anon good Nurse, sweet Mountague be true:
Stay but a little, I will come again.

O blessed blessed night, I am afear'd
Being in night, all this is but a dream,
Too flattering sweet to be substantial.

Three words dear Romeo,
And goodnight indeed,
If that thy bent of Love be Honorable,
Thy purpose marriage, send me word to morrow,
By one that I Will procure to come to thee,
Where and what time thou will perform the right,
And all my Fortunes at thy foot I Will lay,
And follow thee my Lord throughout the world.
I come, anon: but if thou meanest not well,
I do beseech theee
(By and by I come)
To cease thy strife, and leave me to my grief,
To morrow will I send.

So thrive my soul.


A thousand times goodnight.


A thousand times the worse to want thy light,
Love goes toward Love as school-boyes from their books
But Love from Love, toward school with heavy looks.

Hist Romeo hist: O for a Falkners voice,
To lure this Tassell gentle back again,
Bondage is hoarse, and may not speak aloud,
Else would I tear the Cave where Echo lies,
And make her ayrie tongue more hoarse, then
With repetition of my Romeo.

It is my soul that calls upon my name.
How silver sweet, sound Lovers tongues by night,
Like softest Music to attending ears.

Romeo.


My Niece.


What a clock to morrow
Shall I send to thee?

By the hour of nine.


I will not fail, it is twenty years till then,
I have forgot why I did call thee back.

Let me stand here till thou remember it.


I shall forget, to have thee still stand there,
Remembering how I Love thy company.

And I Will still stay, to have thee still forget,
Forgetting any other home but this.

It Is almost morning, I would have thee gone,
And yet no further then a wantons Bird,
That let us it hop a little from his hand,
Like a poor prisoner in his twisted Gyues,
And with a silken thread plucks it back again,
So loving Jealous of his liberty.

I would I were thy Bird.


Sweet so would I,
Yet I should kill thee with much cherishing:
Good night, good night.

Parting is such sweet sorrow,
That I shall say goodnight, till it be morrow.

Sleep dwell upon thine eyes, peace in thy breast.


Would I were sleep and peace so sweet to rest,
The gray eyed morn smiles on the frowning night,
Checkring the Eastern Clouds with streakes of light,
And darkness fleckel'd like a drunkard reeles,
From forth days pathway, made by Titans wheels.
Hence will I to my ghostly Fries close Cell,
His help to crave, and my dear hap to tell.

The gray eyed morn smiles on the frowning night,
Checkring the Eastern Clouds with streaks of light.
And fleckled darkness like a drunkard reeles,
From forth days path, and Titans burning wheels:
Now ere the Sun advance his burning eye,
The day to cheer, and nights danke dew to dry,
I must vpfill this Osier Cage of ours,
With balefull weeds, and precious Iuiced flowers,
The earth that is Natures mother, is her Tomb,
What is her burying grave that is her womb:
And from her womb children of diverse kind
We sucking on her natural bosom find:
Many for many virtues excellent:
None but for some, and yet all different.
Omickle is the powerful grace that lies
In Plants, Herbs, stones, and their true qualities:
For naught so vile, that on the earth does live,
But to the earth some special good does give.
Nor ought so good, but strained from that fair use,
Reuolts from true birth, stumbling on abuse.
Virtue it self turns vice being misapplied,
And vice sometime by action dignified.
Within the infant rin'd of this weak flower,
Poison has residence, and medicine power:
For this being smelt, with that part cheares each part,
Being tasted slayes all senses with the heart.
Two such opposed Kings encampe them still,
In man as well as Herbs, grace and rude will:
And where the worser is predominant,
Full soon the Canker death eats up that Plant.

Good morrow Father.


Benedecite.
What early tongue so sweet saluteth me?
Young Son, it argues a distempered head,
So soon to bid goodmorrow to thy bed;
Care keeps his watch in every old man's eye,
And where Care lodges, sleep will never lie:
But where vnbrused you^h with vnstuft brain
Does couch his lims, there, golden sleep does reign;
Therefore thy earliness does me assure,
Thou art vprous'd with some diftemprature;
Or if not so, then here I hit it right.
Our Romeo has not been in bed to night.

That last is true, the sweeter rest was mine.


God pardon sin: wast thou with Rosaline?


With Rosaline, my ghostly Father? No,
I have forgot that name, and that names woe.

That Is my good Son, but where have thou bin then?


I Will tell thee ere thou ask it me again:
I have been feasting with mine enemy,
Where on a s^dden one has wounded me,
That Is by me wounded: both our remedies
Within thy help and holy physic lies:
I bear no hatred, blessed man: for lo
My intercession likewise steads my foe.

Be plain good Son, rest homely in thy drift,
Ridling confession, finds but ridling shrift.

Then plainly know my hearts dear Love is set,
On the fair daughter of rich Capulet:
As mine on hers, so hers is set on mine;
And all combined, save what thou must combine
By holy marriage: when and where, and how,
We met, we wooed, and made exchange of vow:
I Will tell thee as we pass, but this I pray,
That thou consent to marry us to day.

Holy S. Francis, what a change is here?
Is Rosaline that thou did Love so dear
So soon forsaken? young men's Love then lies
Not truly in their hearts, but in their eyes.
Jesus Maria, what a deal of brine
Has washed thy sallow cheeks for Rosaline?
How much salt water thrown away in wast,
To season Love that of it does not taste.
The Sun not yet thy sighs, from heaven cleares,
Thy old groans yet ringing in my ancient ears:
Lo here upon thy cheek the stain does sit,
Of an old tear that is not washed off yet.
If ere thou wast thy self, and these woes thine,
Thou and these woes, were all for Rosaline.
And art thou changed? pronounce this sentence then,
Women may fall, when there is no strength in men.

Thou chid'st me often for loving Rosaline.


For doting not for loving pupil mine.


And bad'st me bury Love.


Not in a grave,
To lay one in, another out to have.

I pray thee chide me not, her I Love now
Does grace for grace, and Love for Love allow:
The other did not so.

O she knew well,
Thy Love did read by rote, that could not spell:
But come young wauerer, come go with me,
In one respect, I Will thy assistant be:
For this alliance may so happy prove,
To turn your household rancor to pure Love.

O let us hence, I stand on sudden have.


Wisely and slow, they stumble that run fast.


Where the deu^le should this Romeo be? came he not home to night?


Not to his Fathers, I spoke with his man.


Why that same pale hard-harted wench, that Rosaline torments him so, that he
will sure run mad


Tibalt, the kinsman to old Capulet, has sent a Letter to his Fathers house.


A challenge on my life.


Romeo will answer it.


Any man that can write, may answer a Letter.


Nay, he will answer the Letters Master how he dares, being dared.


Alas poor Romeo, he is already dead stabbed with a white wenche^ black eye,
run through the ear with a Love song, the very pin of his heart, cleft
with the blind Bowe-boyes but-shaft, and is he a man to encounter Tybalt


Why what is Tibalt?


More then Prince of Cats. Oh he is the Courageous Captain of Complements: he
fights as you sing pricksong, keeps time, distance, and proportion, he rests
his minum, one, two, and the third in your bosom: the very butcher of a silk
button, a Dualist, a Dualist: a Gentleman of the very first house of the first
and second cause: ah the immortal Passado, the Punto reuerso, the Hay


The what?


The Pox of such antique lisping affecting phantacies, these new tuners of
accent: Jesus a very good blade, a very tall man, a very good whore. Why is not
this a lamentable thing Grandsire, that we should be thus afflicted with these
strange flies: these fashion Mongers, these pardon-mee's, who stand so much on
the new form, that they cannot sit at ease on the old bench. O their bones,
their bones


Here comes Romeo, here comes Romeo.


Without his Roe, like a dried Hering. O flesh, flesh, how art thou fishified?
Now is he for the numbers that Petrarch flowed in: Laura to his Lady, was a
kitchen wench, marry she had a better Love to be rhyme her: Dido a dowdie,
Cleopatra a Gypsy, Hellen and Hero, hildinsgs and Harlots: Thisbie a gray eye
or so, but not to the purpose. Signior Romeo, Bon iour, there is a French
salutation to your French slop: you gave us the the counterfeit fairly last
night


Good morrow to you both, what counterfeit did I give you?


The slip sir, the slip, can you not conceive?


Pardon Mercutio, my business was great, and in such a case as mine, a man may
strain courtesy


That Is as much as to say, such a case as yours constrains a man to bow in the
hams


Meaning to cursie.


Thou have most kindly hit it.


A most courteous exposition.


Nay, I am the very pinck of courtesy.


Pinke for flower.


Right.


Why then is my Pump well flowr'd.


Sure wit, follow me this jest, now till thou have worn out thy Pump, that
when the single sole of it is worn, the jest may remain after the wearing,
sole-singular


O single sol'd jest,
Soly singular for the singleness.

Come between us good Benuolio, my wits faints.


Swits and spurs,
Swits and spurs, or I Will cry a match.

Nay, if our wits run the Wild-Goose chase, I am done: For thou have more of
the Wild-Goose in one of thy wits, then I am sure I have in my whole five. Was
I with you there for the Goose


Thou wast never with me for any thing, when thou wast not there for the Goose.


I will bite thee by the ear for that jest.


Nay, good Goose bite not.


Thy wit is a very Bitter-sweeting,
It is a most sharp sauce.

And is it not well served into a Sweet-Goose?


Oh here is a wit of Cheuerell, that stretches from an ynch narrow, to an ell
broad


I stretch it out for that word, broad, which added to the Goose, proves thee
far and wide, abroad Goose


Why is not this better now, then groaning for Love, now art thou sociable, now
art thou Romeo: now art thou what thou art, by Art as well as by Nature, for
this driueling Love is like a great Natural, that runs lolling up and down to
hid his babble in a hole


Stop there, stop there.


Thou desir'st me to stop in my tale against the hair.


Thou would else have made thy tale large.


O thou art deceived, I would have made it short, or I was come to the whole
depth of my tale, and meant indeed to occupy the argument no longer


Here Is goodly gear.
A sail, a sail.

Two, two: a Shirt and a Smock.


Peter?


Anon.


My Fan Peter?


Good Peter to hide her face?
For her Fans the fairer face?

God ye good morrow Gentlemen.


God ye gooden fair Gentlewoman.


Is it gooden?


It Is no less I tell you: for the bawdy hand of the Dyall is now upon the
prick of Noone


Out upon you: what a man are you?


One Gentlewoman,
That God has made, himself to mar.

By my troth it is said, for himself to, mar quatha: Gentlemen, can any of you
tell me where I may find the young Romeo


I can tell you: but young Romeo will be older when you have found him, then he
was when you sought him: I am the youngest of that name, for fault of a worse


You say well.


Yea is the worst well,
Very well took: I faith, wisely, wisely.

If you be he sir,
I desire some confidence with you?

She will endite him to some Supper.


A baud, a baud, a baud. So no.


What have thou found?


No Hare sir, unless a Hare sir in a Lenten pie, that is something stale and
hoare ere it be spent
An old Hare hoare, and an old Hare hoare is very good meat in Lent.
But a Hare that is hoare is too much for a score* when it hoares ere it be
spent
Romeo will you come to your Fathers? We Will to dinner thither.

I will follow you.


Farewell ancient Lady:
Farewell Lady, Lady, Lady.

I pray you sir, what saucy Merchant was this that was so full of his roperie?


A Gentleman Nurse, that loves to hear himself talk, and will speak more in
a minute, then he will stand to in a Month


And a speak any thing against me, I Will take him down, and a were lustier then
he is, and twenty such Iacks: and if I cannot, I Will find those that shall:
scuruie knave, I am none of his flurt-gils, I am none of his skaines mates, and
thou must stand by too and suffer every knave to use me at his pleasure


I saw no man use you at his pleasure: if I had, my weapon should quickly have
been out, I warrant you, I dare draw as soon as another man, if I see occasion
in a good quarrel, and the law on my side


Now before God, I am so vexed, that every part about me quiuers, skuruy knave:
pray you sir a word: and as I told you, my young Lady bid me enquire you out,
what she bid me say, I will keep to my self: but first let me tell ye, if ye
should lead her in a fools paradise, as they say, it were a very gross kind
of behavior, as they say: for the Gentlewoman is young: and therefore, if you
should deal double with her, truly it were an ill thing to be offered to any
Gentlewoman, and very weak dealing


Nurse commend me to thy Lady and Mistress, I protest unto thee.


Good heart, and in faith I will tell her as much:
Lord, Lord she will be a joyful woman.

What will thou tell her Nurse? thou do not mark me?


I will tell her sir, that you do protest, which as I take it, is a
Gentleman-like offer


Bid her devise some means to come to shrift this afternoon,
And there she shall at Friar Lawrence Cell
Beshriu'd and married: here is for thy pains.

No truly sir not a penny.


Go too, I say you shall.


This afternoon sir? well she shall be there.


And stay thou good Nurse behind the Abbey wall,
Within this hour my man shall be with thee,
And bring thee Cords made like a tackled staire*
Which to the high top gallant of my joy,
Must be my conuoy in the secret night.
Farewell, be trusty and I Will quite thy pains:
Farewell, commend me to thy Mistress.

Now God in heaven bless thee: hark you sir,


What say thou my dear Nurse?


Is your man secret, did you nere hear say two may keep counsel putting one
away


Warrant thee my man as true as steel.


Well sir, my Mistress is the sweetest Lady, Lord, Lord, when 'twas a little
pra^ing thing. O there is a Noble man in Town one Paris, that would feign lay
knife aboard: but she good soul had as leeue a see Toade, a very Toade as see
him: I anger her sometimes, and tell her that Paris is the propere^ man, but
I Will warrant you, when I say so, she looks as pale as any clout in the versall
world. Does not Rosemarie and Romeo begin both with a letter


I Nurse, what of that? Both with an R


A mocker that is the dogs name, R. is for the no, I know it begins with some
other letter, and she has the prettiest sententious of it, of you and
Rosemary, that it would do you good to hear it


Commend me to thy Lady.


I a thousand times. Peter?


Anon.


Before and apace.


The clock struck nine, when I did send the Nurse,
In half an hour she promised to return,
Perchance she cannot meet him: that is not so:
Oh she is lame, Loves Herald should be thoughts,
Which ten times faster glides then the Suns beams,
Driving back shadows over lowering hills.
Therefore do nimble Pinioned Doves draw Love,
And therefore has the wind-swift Cupid wings:
Now is the Sun upon the highmost hill
Of this days journey, and from nine till twelve,
I three long hours, yet she is not come.
Had she affections and warm youthful blood,
She would be as swift in motion as a ball,
My words would bandy her to my sweet Love,
And his to me, but old folks,
Many feign as they were dead,
Vnwieldie, slow, heavy, and pale as lead.
O God she comes, O honey Nurse what news?
Have thou met with him? send thy man away.

Peter stay at the gate.


Now good sweet Nurse:
O Lord, why look thou sad?
Though news, be sad, yet tell them merrily.
If good thou sham'st the music of sweet news,
By playing it to me, with so sower a face.

I am a weary, give me leave awhile,
Fie how my bones ache, what a iaunt have I had?

I would thou had my bones, and I thy news:
Nay come I pray thee speak, good good Nurse speak.

Jesus what have? can you not stay a while?
Do you not see that I am out of breath?

How art thou out of breath, when thou have breath
To say to me, that thou art out of breath?
The excuse that thou do make in this delay,
Is longer then the tale thou do excuse.
Is thy news good or bad? answer to that,
Say either, and I Will stay the circustance:
Let me be satisfied, is it good or bad?

Well, you have made a simple choice, you know not how to choose a man: Romeo,
no not he though his face be better then any man's, yet his legs excels all
men's, and for a hand, and a foot, and a body, though they be not to be talked
on, yet they are past compare: he is not the flower of courtesy, but I Will
warrant him as gentle a Lamb: go thy ways wench, serve God. What have you
dined at home


No no: but all this this did I know before
What says he of our marriage? what of that?

Lord how my head aches, what a head have I?
It beats as it would fall in twenty pieces.
My back at other side: o my back, my back:
Beshrew your heart for sending me about
To catch my death with iaunting up and down.

In Faith: I am sorry that that thou art so well.
Sweet sweet, sweet Nurse, tell me what says my Love?

Your Love says like an honest Gentleman,
And a courteous, and a kind, and a handsome,
And I warrant a virtuous: where is your Mother?

Where is my Mother?
Why she is within, where should she be?
How odly thou repli'st:
Your Love says like an honest Gentleman
Where is your Mother?

O Gods Lady dear,
Are you so hot? marry come up I trow,
Is this the Poultis for my aching bones?
Henceforward do your messages your self.

Here Is such a coile, come what says Romeo?


Have you got leave to go to shrift to day?


I have.


Then high you hence to Friar Lawrence Cell,
There stays a Husband to make you a wife:
Now comes the wanton blood up in your cheeks,
The^'le be in Scarlet straight at any news:
Hie you to Church, I must an other way,
To fetch a Ladder by the which your Love
Must climde a birds nest Soon when it is dark:
I am the drudge, and toil in your delight:
But you shall bear the burden soon at night.
Go I Will to dinner, hie you to the Cell.

Hie to high Fortune, honest Nurse, farewell.


So smile the heavens upon this holy act,
That after hours, with sorrow chide us not.

Amen, amen, but come what sorrow can,
It cannot counteruaile the exchange of joy
That one short minute gives me in her sight:
Do thou but close our hands with holy words,
Then Loue-deuouring death do what he dare,
It is enough. I may but call her mine.

These violent delights have violent ends,
And in their triumph: die like fire and powder;
Which as they kiss consume. The sweetest honey
Is loathsome in his own deliciousness,
And in the taste confoundes the appetite.
Therefore Love moderately, long Love does so,
Too swift arriues as tardie as too slow.
Here comes the Lady. Oh so light a foot
Will nere wear out the everlasting flint,
A Lover may bestride the Gossamours,
That ydles in the wanton Summer air,
And yet not fall, so light is vanity.

Good even to my ghostly Confessor.


Romeo shall thank thee Daughter for us both.


As much to him, else in his thanks too much.


Ah Juliet, if the measure of thy joy
Be heapt like mine, and that thy skill be more
To blason it, then sweeten with thy breath
This neighbor air, and let rich musickes tongue.
Unfold the imagined happiness that both
Receive in either, by this dear encounter.

Conceit more rich in matter then in words,
Brags of his substance, not of Ornament:
They are but beggars that can count their worth,
But my true Love is grown to such such excess,
I cannot sum up some of half my wealth.

Come, come with me, and we will make short work,
For by your leaves, you shall not stay alone,
Till holy Church incorporate two in one.

I pray thee good Mercutio lets retire,
The day is hot, the Capulets abroad:
And if we meet, we shall not escape a brawle, for now these hot days, is the
mad blood stirring

Thou art like one of these fellows, that when he enters the confines of a
Tavern, claps me his Sword upon the Table, and says, God send me no need of
thee: and by the operation of the second cup, drawn him on the Drawer, when
indeed there is no need


Am I like such a Fellow?


Come, come, thou art as hot a Jack in thy mood, as any in Italy: and as soon
moved to be moodie, and as soon moodie to be moved


And what too?


Nay, and there were two such, we should have none shortly, for one would kill
the other: thou, why thou will quarrel with a man that has a hair more, or a
hair less in his beard, then thou have: thou will quarrel with a man for
cracking Nuts, having no other reason, but because thou have hasell eyes: what
eye, but such an eye, would spy out such a quarrel? thy head is as full of
quarrels, as an egg is full of meat, and yet thy head has bin beaten as addle
as an egg for quarreling: thou have quarreled with a man for coffing in the
street, because he has wakened thy Dog that has lain asleep in the Sun.
Did thou not fall out with a Tailor for wearing his new Doublet before
Easter? with another, for tying his new shoes with old Riband, and yet thou will Tutor me from quarrelling


And I were so apt to quarrel as thou art, any man should buy the Fee-simple of
my life, for an hour and a quarter


The Fee-simple? O simple.


By my head here comes the Capulets.


By my heel I care not.


Follow me close, for I will speak to them.
Gentlemen, Good den, a word with one of you.

And but one word with one of us? couple it with something, make it a word and
a blow


You shall find me apt enough to that sir, and you will give me occasion.


Could you not take some occasion without giving?


Mercutio thou consort'st with Romeo.


Consort? what do thou make us Minstrels? and thou make Minstrels of us,
look to hear nothing but discords: here is my fiddlesticke, here is that
shall make you dance. Come consort


We talk here in the public haunt of men:
Either withdraw unto some private place,
Or reason coldly of your greeuances:
Or else depart, here all eyes gaze on us.

Men's eyes were made to look, and let them gaze.
I will not budge for no man's pleasure I.

Well peace be with you sir, here comes my man.


But I Will be hanged sir if he wear your Livery.
Marry go before to field, heel be your follower,
Your worship in that sense, may call him man.

Romeo, the love I bear thee, can afford
No better term then this: Thou art a Villain.

Tibalt, the reason that I have to love thee,
Does much excuse the appertaining rage
To such a greeting: Villain am I none;
Therefore farewell, I see thou know me not.

Boy, this shall not excuse the injuries
That thou have done me, therefore turn and draw.

I do protest I never injured thee,
But loved thee better then thou can devise:
Till thou shall know the reason of my love,
And so good Capulet, which name I tender
As dearly as my own, be satisfied.

O calm, dishonorable, vile submission:
Alla stucatho carries it away.
Tybalt, you Rat-catcher, will you walk?

What woulds thou have with me?


Good King of Cats, nothing but one of your nine lives, that I mean to make
bold withal, and as you shall use me hereafter dry beat the rest of the
eight. Will you pluck your Sword out of his Pilcher by the ears? Make have,
least mine be about your ears ere it be out


I am for you.


Gentle Mercutio, put thy Rapier up.


Come sir, your Passado.


Draw Benuolio, beat down their weapons:
Gentlemen, for shame forbear this outrage,
Tibalt, Mercutio, the Prince expressly has
Forbidden bandying in Verona streets.
Hold Tybalt, good Mercutio.

I am hurt.
A plague a both the Houses, I am sped:
Is he gone and has nothing?

What art thou hurt?


I, I, a scratch, a scratch, marry it is enough,
Where is my Page? go Villain fetch a Surgeon.

Courage man, the hurt cannot be much.


No: it is not so deep as a well, nor so wide as a Church door, but it is
enough, 'twill serve: ask for me to morrow, and you shall find me a grave man.
I am peppered I warrant, for this world: a plague a both your houses. What, a
Dog, a Rat, a Mouse, a Cat to scratch a man to death: a Braggart, a Rogue, a
Villain, that fights by the book of Arithmeticke, why the deu'le came you
between us? I was hurt under your arm


I thought all for the best.


Help me into some house Benuolio,
Or I shall faint: a plague a both your houses.
They have made worms meat of me,
I have it, and soundly to your Houses.

This Gentleman the Princes near Alie,
My very Friend has got his mortal hurt
In my behalf, my reputation stained
With Tibalts slander, Tybalt that an hour
Has been my Cousin: O Sweet Juliet,
Thy Beauty has made me Effeminate,
And in my temper softened Valors steel.

O Romeo, Romeo, brave Mercutio's is dead,
That Gallant spirit has aspired the Clouds,
Which too untimely here did scorn the earth.

This days black Fate, on mo days does depend,
This but begins, the woe others must end.

Here comes the Furious Tybalt back again.


He gone in triumph, and Mercutio slain?
Away to heaven respective Lenity,
And fire and Fury, be my conduct now.
Now Tybalt take the Villain back again
That late thou gave me, for Mercutios soul
Is but a little way above our heads,
Staying for thine to keep him company:
Either thou or I, or both, must go with him.

Thou wretched Boy that did consort him here,
Shall with him hence.

This shall determine that.


Romeo, away be gone:
The Citizens are up, and Tybalt slain,
Stand not amazed, the Prince will Doom thee death
If thou art taken: hence, be gone, away.

O! I am Fortunes fool.


Why do thou stay?


Which way ran he that killed Mercutio?
Tibalt that Murderer, which way ran he?

There lies that Tybalt.


Up sir go with me:
I charge thee in the Princes names obey.

Where are the vile beginners of this Fray?


O Noble Prince, I can discover all
The unlucky Manage of this fatal brall:
There lies the man slain by young Romeo,
That slew thy kinsman brave Mercutio.

Tybalt, my Cousin? O my Brothers Child,
O Prince, O Cousin, Husband, O the blood is spild
Of my dear kinsman. Prince as thou art true,
For blood of ours, shed blood of Mountague.
O Cousin, Cousin.

Benuolio, who began this Fray?


Tybalt here slain, whom Romeo's hand did slay,
Romeo that spoke him fair, bid him bethink
How nice the Quarrel was, and urged withal
Your high displeasure: all this uttered,
With gentle breath, calm look, knees humbly bowed
Could not take truce with the unruly spleen
Of Tybalts deaf to peace, but that he Tilts
With Peircing steel at bold Mercutio's breast,
Who all as hot, turns deadly point to point,
And with a Martial scorn, with one hand beats
Cold death aside, and with the other sends
It back to Tybalt, whose dexterity
Retorts it: Romeo he cries aloud,
Hold Friends, Friends part, and swifter then his tongue,
His aged arm beats down their fatal points,
And twixt them rushes, underneath whose arm,
An envious thrust from Tybalt, hit the life
Of stout Mercutio, and then Tybalt fled.
But by and by comes back to Romeo,
Who had but newly entertained Revenge,
And to it they go like lightning, for ere I
Could draw to part them, was stout Tybalt slain:
And as he fell, did Romeo turn and fly:
This is the truth, or let Benuolio die.

He is a kinsman to the Mountague,
Affection makes him false, he speaks not true
Some twenty of them fought in this black strife,
And all those twenty could but kill one life.
I beg for Justice, which thou Prince must give:
Romeo slew Tybalt, Romeo must not live.

Romeo slew him, he slew Mercutio,
Who now the price of his dear blood does owe.

Not Romeo Prince, he was Mercutios Friend,
His fault concludes, but what the law should end,
The life of Tybalt.

And for that offense,
Immediately we do exile him hence:
I have an interest in your hearts proceeding:
My blood for your rude brawles does lie a bleeding.
But I Will Amerce you with so strong a fine,
That you shall all repent the loss of mine.
It will be deaf to pleading and excuses,
Nor tears, nor prayers shall purchase our abuses.
Therefore use none, let Romeo hence in have,
Else when he is found, that hour is his last.
Bear hence this body, and attend our will:
Mercy not Murders, pardoning those that kill.

Gallop apace, you fiery footed fleedes,
Toward Phoebus lodging, such a Wagoner
As Phaeton would whip you to the west,
And bring in Cloudie night immediately.
Spread thy close Curtain Loue-performing night,
That run-awayes eyes may wincke and Romeo
Leap to these arms, vntalkt of and unseen,
Lovers can see to do their Amorous rights,
And by their own Beauties: or if Love be blind,
It best agrees with night: come civil night,
Thou sober suited Matron all in black,
And learn me how to loose a winning match,
Played for a pair of stainlesse Maidenhoods,
Hood my vnman'd blood bayting in my Cheeks,
With thy Black mantle, till strange Love grow bold,
Think true Love acted simple modesty:
Come night, come Romeo, come thou day in night,
For thou will lie upon the wings of night
Whiter then new Snow upon a Ravens back:
Come gentle night, come loving blackebrow'd night.
Give me my Romeo, and when I shall die,
Take him and cut him out in little stars,
And he will make the Face of heaven so fine,
That all the world will be in Love with night,
And pay no worship to the Garish Sun.
O I have bought the Mansion of a Love,
But not possessed it, and though I am sold,
Not yet enjoyed, so tedious is this day,
As is the night before some Festival,
To an impatient child that has new robes
And may not wear them, O here comes my Nurse:
And she brings news and every tongue that speaks
But Romeos, name, speaks heavenly eloquence:
Now Nurse, what news? what have thou there?
The Cords that Romeo bid thee fetch?

I, I, the Cords.


Ay me, what news?
Why do thou wring thy hands.

A welady, he is dead, he is dead,
We are undone Lady, we are undone.
Alack the day, he is gone, he is killed, he is dead.

Can heaven be so envious?


Romeo can,
Though heaven cannot. O Romeo, Romeo.
Who ever would have thought it Romeo.

What devil art thou,
That do torment me thus?
This torture should be roared in dismal hell,
Has Romeo slain himself? say thou but I,
And that bare vowell I shall poison more
Then the death-darting eye of Cockatrice,
I am not I, if there be such an I.
Or those eyes shot, that makes thee answer I:
If he be slain say I, or if not, no.
Brief, sounds, determine of my weal or woe.

I saw the wound, I saw it with mine eyes,
God save the mark, here on his manly breast,
A pitteous Coarse, a bloody piteous Coarse:
Pale, pale as ashes, all bedawb'd in blood,
All in gore blood, I sounded at the sight-

O break my heart,
Poor Banckrout break at once,
To prison eyes, nere look on liberty.
Vile earth to earth resign, end motion here,
And thou and Romeo press on heavy beer.

O Tybalt, Tybalt, the best Friend I had:
O courteous Tybalt honest Gentleman,
That ever I should live to see thee dead.

What storm is this that blows so contrary?
Is Romeo slaughtred? and is Tybalt dead?
My dearest Cozen, and my dearer Lord:
Then dreadful Trumpet sound the general doom,
For who is living, if those two are gone:

Tybalt is gone, and Romeo banished,
Romeo that killed him, he is banished.

O God!
Did Rom'os hand shed Tybalts blood
It did, it did, alas the day, it did.

O Serpent heart, hid with a flowring face.


Did ever Dragon keep so fair a Cave?
Beautiful Tyrant, fiend Angelical:
Ravenous Doue-feather'd Raven,
Woluish-rauening Lamb,
Despised substance of Diuinest show:
Just opposite to what thou justly seem,
A dimne Saint, an Honorable Villain:
O Nature! what had thou to do in hell,
When thou did bower the spirit of a fiend
In mortal paradise of such sweet flesh?
Was ever book containing such vile matter
So fairly bound? O that deceit should dwell
In such a gorgeous Palace.

There Is no trust, no faith, no honesty in men,
All periu'rd, all forsworn, all naught, all dissemblers,
Ah where is my man? give me some Aqua-vitae?
These griefs, these woes, these sorrows make me old:
Shame come to Romeo.

Blister'd be thy tongue
For such a wish, he was not borne to shame:
Upon his brow shame is ashamed to sit;
For it is a throane where Honor may be Grown'd
Sole Monarch of the universal earth:
O what a beast was I to chide him?

Will you speak well of him,
That killed your Cozen?

Shall I speak ill of him that is my husband?
Ah poor my Lord, what tongue shall smooth thy name,
When I thy three hours wife have mangled it.
But wherefore Villain did thou kill my Cousin?
That Villain Cousin would have killed my husband:
Back foolish tears, back to your native spring,
Your tributarie drops belong to woe,
Which you mistaking offer up to joy:
My husband lives that Tibalt would have slain,
And Tibalt dead that would have slain my husband:
All this is comfort, wherefore weep I then?
Some words there was worser then Tybalts death
That murdered me, I would forget it feine,
But oh, it presses to my memory,
Like damned guilty deeds to sinners minds,
Tybalt is dead and Romeo banished:
That banished, that one word banished,
Has slain ten thousand Tibalts: Tibalts death
Was woe enough if it had ended there:
Or if sower woe delights in fellowship,
And needly will be rankt with other griefs,
Why followed not when she said Tibalts dead,
Thy Father or thy Mother, nay or both,
Which modern lamentation might have moved.
But which a rere-ward following Tybalts death
Romeo is banished to speak that word,
Is Father, Mother, Tybalt, Romeo, Juliet,
All slain, all dead: Romeo is banished,
There is no end, no limit, measure, bound,
In that words death, no words can that woe sound.
Where is my Father and my Mother Nurse?

Weeping and wailing over Tybalts Coarse,
Will you go to them? I will bring you thither.

Wash they his wounds with tears: mine shall be spent
When theirs are dry for Romeo's banishment.
Take up those Cords, poor ropes you are beguiled,
Both you and I for Romeo is exild:
He made you for a highway to my bed,
But I a Maid, die Maiden widowed.
Come Cord, come Nurse, I Will to my wedding bed,
And death not Romeo, take my Maiden head.

Hie to your Chamber, I Will find Romeo
To comfort you, I wot well where he is:
Hark ye your Romeo will be here at night,
I Will to him, he is hid at Lawrence Cell.

O find him, give this Ring to my true Knight,
And bid him come, to take his last farewell.

Romeo come forth,
Come forth thou fearful man,
Affliction is enamored of thy parts:
And thou art wedded to calamity.

Father what news?
What is the Princes Doom?
What sorrow craves acquaintance at my hand,
That I yet know not?

Too familiar
Is my dear Son with such sour Company:
I bring thee tidings of the Princes Doom.

What less then Doomesday,
Is the Princes Doom?

A gentler judgment vanished from his lips,
Not bodies death, but bodies banishment.

Ha, banishment? be merciful, say death:
For exile has more terror in his look,
Much more then death: do not say banishment.

Here from Verona art thou banished:
Be patient, for the world is broad and wide.

There is no world without Verona walls,
But Purgatory, Torture, hell it self:
Hence banished, is banished from the world,
And worlds exile is death. Then banished,
Is death, mistearm'd, calling death banished,
Thou cut'st my head off with a golden Axe,
And smilest upon the stroke that murders me.

O deadly sin, O rude unthankfulness!
Thy falt our Law calls death, but the kind Prince
Taking thy part, has rusht aside the Law,
And turned that black word death, to banishment.
This is dear mercy, and thou see it not.

It Is Torture and not mercy, heaven is here
Where Juliet lives, and every Cat and Dog,
And little Mouse, every unworthy thing
Live here in Heaven and may look on her,
But Romeo may not. More Validity,
More Honorable state, more Courtship lives
In carrion Flies, then Romeo: they may seize
On the white wonder of dear Iuliets hand.
And steal immortal blessing from her lips,
Who even in pure and vestall modesty
Still blush, as thinking their own kisses sin.
This may Flies do, when I from this must fly,
And say thou yet, that exile is not death?
But Romeo may not, he is banished.
Had thou no poison mixed, no sharp ground knife,
No sudden mean of death, though nere so mean,
But banished to kill me? Banished?
O Friar, the damned use that word in hell:
Howlings attends it, how have thou the heart
Being a Divine, a Ghostly Confessor,
A Sin-Absoluer, and my Friend professed:
To mangle me with that word, banished?

Then fond Mad man, hear me speak.


O thou will speak again of banishment.


I Will give thee Armor to keep off that word,
Adversities sweet milk, Philosophy,
To comfort thee, though thou art banished.

Yet banished? hang up Philosophy:
Unless Philosohpie can make a Juliet,
Displant a Town, reuerse a Princes Doom,
It helps not, it preuailes not, talk no more.

O then I see, that Mad men have no ears.


How should they,
When wisemen have no eyes?

Let me despair with thee of thy estate,


Thou can not speak of that you do not feel,
Were thou as young as Juliet my Love:
An hour but married, Tybalt murdered,
Doting like me, and like me banished,
Then might thou speak,
Then might thou tear thy hair,
And fall upon the ground as I do now,
Taking the measure of an unmade grave.

Arise one knockes,
Good Romeo hide thy self.

Not I,
Unless the breath of Hartsicke groans
Mist-like infold me from the search of eyes.

Hark how they knock:
(Who Is there) Romeo arise,
Thou will be taken, stay a while, stand up:
Run to my study: by and by, Gods will
What simpleness is this: I come, I come.
Who knocks so hard?
Whence come you? what is your will?

Let me come in,
And you shall know my errand:
I come from Lady Juliet.

Welcome then.


O holy Friar, O tell me holy Friar,
Where Is my Ladies Lord? where is Romeo?

There on the ground,
With his own tears made drunk.

O he is even in my Mistress case,
Just in her case. O woeful simpathy:
Pittious predicament, even so lies she,
Blubbring and weeping, weeping and blubbring,
Stand up, stand up, stand and you be a man,
For Iuliets sake, for her sake rise and stand:
Why should you fall into so deep an O.

Nurse.


Ah sir, ah sir, deaths the end of all.


Speak thou of Juliet? how is it with her?
Does not she think me an old Murderer,
Now I have stained the Childhood of our joy,
With blood removed, but little from her own?
Where is she? and how does she? and what says
My concealed Lady to our concealed Love?

Oh she says nothing sir, but weeps and weeps,
And now falls on her bed, and then starts up,
And Tybalt calls, and then on Romeo cries,
And then down falls again.

As if that name shot from the dead level of a Gun,
Did murder her, as that names cursed hand
Murdered her kinsman. Oh tell me Friar, tell me,
In what vile part of this Anatomy
Does my name lodge? Tell me, that I may sack
The hateful Mansion.

Hold thy desperate hand:
Art thou a man? thy form cries out thou art:
Thy tears are womanish, thy wild acts denote
The unreasonable Fury of a beast.
Unseemly woman, in a seeming man,
And ill beseeming beast in seeming both,
Thou have amazed me. By my holy order,
I thought thy disposition better tempered.
Have thou slain Tybalt? will thou slay thy self?
And slay thy Lady, that in thy life lies,
By doing damned hate upon thy self?
Why rayl'st thou on thy birth? the heaven and earth?
Since birth, and heaven and earth, all three do meet
In thee at once, which thou at once would loose.
Fie, fie, thou sham'st thy shape, thy love, thy wit,
Which like a Usurer abound'st in all:
And use none in that true use indeed,
Which should bedecke thy shape, thy love, thy wit:
Thy Noble shape, is but a form of wax,
Digressing from the Valor of a man,
Thy dear Love sworn but hollow perjury,
Killing that Love which thou have vowed to cherish.
Thy wit, that Ornament, to shape and Love,
Misshapen in the conduct of them both:
Like powder in a skillesse Soldiers flaske,
Is set a fire by thine own ignorance,
And thou dismembered with thine own defense.
What, rowse thee man, thy Juliet is alive,
For whose dear sake thou wast but lately dead.
There art thou happy. Tybalt would kill thee,
But thou slew'st Tybalt, there art thou happy.
The law that threatened death became thy Friend,
And turned it to exile, there art thou happy.
A pack or blessing light upon thy back,
Happiness Courts thee in her best array,
But like a mishaped and sullen wench,
Thou put up thy Fortune and thy Love:
Take heed, take heed, for such die miserable.
Go get thee to thy Love as was decreed,
Ascend her Chamber, hence and comfort her:
But look thou stay not till the watch be set,
For then thou can not pass to Mantua,
Where thou shall live till we can find a time
To blaze your marriage, reconcile your Friends,
Beg pardon of thy Prince, and call thee back,
With twenty hundred thousand times more joy
Then thou went forth in lamentation.
Go before Nurse, commend me to thy Lady,
And bid her hasten all the house to bed,
Which heavy sorrow makes them apt unto.
Romeo is coming.

O Lord, I could have staid here all night,
To hear good counsel: oh what learning is!
My Lord I Will tell my Lady you will come.

Do so, and bid my Sweet prepare to chide.


Here sir, a Ring she bid me give you sir:
Hie you, make have, for it grows very late.

How well my comfort is revived by this.


Go hence,
Goodnight, and here stands all your state:
Either be gone before the watch be set,
Or by the break of day disguised from hence,
Soiourne in Mantua, I Will find out your man,
And he shall signify from time to time,
Every good hap to you, that chances here:
Give me thy hand, it is late, farewell, goodnight.

But that a joy past joy, calls out on me,
It were a grief, so brief to part with thee:
Farewell.

Things have fallen ou^ sir so unluckily,
That we have had no time to move our Daughter:
Look you, she Loved her kinsman Tybalt dearly,
And so did I. Well, we were borne to die.
It Is very late, she will not come down to night:
I promise you, but for your company,
I would have bin a bed an hour ago.

These times of woe, afford no times to woo:
Madam goodnight, commend me to your Daughter.

I will, and know her mind early to morrow,
To night, she is mewed up to her heaviness.

Sir Paris, I will make a desperate tender
Of my Childs love: I think she will be ruled
In all respects by me: nay more, I doubt it not.
Wife, go you to her ere you go to bed,
Acquaint her here, of my Son Paris Love,
And bid her, mark you me, on Wendsday next,
But soft, what day is this?

Monday my Lord.


Monday, ha ha: well Wendsday is too soon,
A Thursday let it be: a Thursday tell her,
She shall be married to this Noble Earl:
Will you be ready? do you like this have?
We Will keep no great ado, a Friend or two,
For hark you, Tybalt being slain so late,
It may be thought we held him carelessly,
Being our kinsman, if we revel much:
Therefore we will have some half a dozen Friends,
And there an end. But what say you to Thursday?

My Lord,
I would that Thursday were to morrow.

Well, get you gone, a Thursday, be it then:
Go you to Juliet ere you go to bed,
Prepare her wife, against this wedding day.
Farewell my Lord, light to my Chamber hoa,
Before me, it is so late, that we may call ir early by and by,
Goodnight.

Will thou be gone? It is not yet near day:
It was the Nightingale, and not the Lark,
That pier'st the fearful hollow of thine ear,
Nightly she sings on yond Pomgranet tree,
Believe me Love, it was the Nightingale.

It was the Lark the Herald of the Morn:
No Nightingale: look Love what envious streakes
Do lace the seuering Clouds in yonder East:
Nights Candles are burnt out, and Iocond day
Stands tip to on the mistie Mountains tops,
I must be gone and live, or stay and die.

Yond light is not daylight, I know it I:
It is some Meteor that the Sun exhales,
To be to thee this night a Torch-bearer,
And light thee on thy way to Mantua.
Therefore stay yet, thou need'st not to be gone,

Let me be taken, let me be put to death,
I am content, so thou will have it so.
I Will say you gray is not the mornings eye,
It Is but the pale reflexe of Cinthias brow.
Nor that is not Lark whose noates do beat
The vaulty heaven so high above our heads,
I have more care to stay, then will to go:
Come death and welcome, Juliet wills it so.
How is it my soul, lets talk, it is not day.

It is, it is, hie hence be gone away:
It is the Lark that sings so out of tune,
Straining harsh Discords, and unpleasing Sharpes.
Some say the Lark makes sweet Division;
This does not so: for she divides us.
Some say, the Lark and loathed Toad change eyes,
O now I would they had changed voices too:
Since arm from arm that voice does us affray,
Hunting thee hence, with Hunts-vp to the day,
O now be gone, more light and it light grows.

More light and light, more dark and dark our woes.


Madam.


Nurse.


Your Lady Mother is coming to your chamber,
The day is broke, be wary, look about.

Then window let day in, and let life out.


Farewell, farewell, one kiss and I Will descend.


Art thou gone so? Love, Lord, ay Husband, Friend,
I must hear from thee every day in the hour,
For in a minute there are many days,
O by this count I shall be much in years,
Ere I again behold my Romeo.

Farewell:
I will omit no opportunity,
That may convey my greetings Love, to thee.

O think thou we shall ever meet again?


I doubt it not, and all these woes shall serve
For sweet discourses in our time to come.

O God! I have an ill Divining soul,
Me thinks I see thee now, thou art so low,
As one dead in the bottom of a Tomb,
Either my eyesight fails, or thou look pale.

And trust me Love, in my eye so do you:
Dry sorrow drinks our blood. Adue, adue.

O Fortune, Fortune, all men call thee fickle,
If thou art fickle, what do thou with him
That is renowned for faith? be fickle Fortune:
For then I hope thou will not keep him long,
But send him back.

Ho Daughter, are you up?


Who is it that calls? Is it my Lady Mother.
Is she not down so late, or up so early?
What vnaccustom'd cause procures her hither?

Why how now Juliet?


Madam I am not well.


Evermore weeping for your Cozins death?
What will thou wash him from his grave with tears?
And if thou could, thou could not make him live:
Therefore have done, some grief shows much of Love,
But much of grief, shows still some want of wit.

Yet let me weep, for such a feeling loss.


So shall you feel the loss, but not the Friend
Which you weep for.

Feeling so the loss,
I cannot choose but ever weep the Friend.

Well Girl, thou weep'st not so much for his death,
As that the Villain lives which slaughtered him.

What Villain, Madam?


That same Villain Romeo.


Villain and he, be many Miles assunder:
God pardon, I do with all my heart:
And yet no man like he, does grieve my heart.

That is because the Traitor lives.


I Madam from the reach of these my hands:
Would none but I might venge my Cozins death.

We will have vengeance for it, fear thou not.
Then weep no more, I Will send to one in Mantua,
Where that same banished Run-ag^te does live,
Shall give him such an vnaccustom'd dram,
That he shall soon keep Tybalt company:
And then I hope thou will be satisfied.

Indeed I never shall be satisfied
With Romeo, till I behold him. Dead
Is my poor heart so for a kinsman vexed:
Madam if you could find out but a man
To bear a poison, I would temper it;
That Romeo should upon receipt thereof,
Soon sleep in quiet. O how my heart abhors
To hear him named, and cannot come to him,
To wreake the Love I bore my Cousin,
Upon his body that has slaughtered him.

Find thou the means, and I Will find such a man.
But now I Will tell thee joyful tidings Gyrle.

And joy comes well, in such a needy time,
What are they, beseech your Ladyship?

Well, well, thou have a careful Father Child?
One who to put thee from thy heaviness,
Has sorted out a sudden day of joy,
That thou expects not, nor I looked not for.

Madam in happy time, what day is this?


Marry my Child, early next Thursday morn,
The gallant, young, and Noble Gentleman,
The County Paris at Saint Peter's Church,
Shall happily make thee a joyful Bride.

Now by Saint Peter's Church, and Peter too,
He shall not make me there a joyful Bride.
I wonder at this have, that I must wed
Ere he that should be Husband comes to woe:
I pray you tell my Lord and Father Madam,
I will not marry yet, and when I do, I swear
It shall be Romeo, whom you know I hate
Rather then Paris. These are news indeed.

Here comes your Father, tell him so your self,
And see how he will take it at your hands.

When the Sun sets, the earth does drizzle daew
But for the Sunset of my Brothers Son,
It raines downright.
How now? A Conduit Gyrle, what still in tears?
Evermore showring in one little body?
Thou counterfaits a Bark, a Sea, a Wind:
For still thy eyes, which I may call the Sea,
Do ebb and flow with tears, the Bark thy body is
Sailing in this falt flood, the winds thy sighs,
Who raging with the tears and they with them,
Without a sudden calm will over set
Thy tempest tossed body. How now wife?
Have you delivered to her our decree?

I sir:
But she will none, she gives you thanks,
I would the fool were married to her grave.

Soft, take me with you, take me with you wife,
How, will she none? does she not give us thanks?
Is she not proud? does she not count her blessed,
Unworthy as she is, that we have wrought
So worthy a Gentleman, to be her Bridegroom

Not proud you have,
But thankful that you have:
Proud can I never be of what I have,
But thankful even for hate, that is meant Love.

How now?
How now? Chopped Logic? what is this?
Proud, and I thank you: and I thank you not.
Thank me no thankings, nor proud me no prouds,
But fettle your fine ioints against Thursday next,
To go with Paris to Saint Peter's Church:
Or I will drag thee, on a Hurdle thither.
Out you green sickness carrion, out you baggage,
You tallow face.

Fie, fie, what are you mad?


Good Father, I beseech you on my knees
Hear me with patience, but to speak a word.

Hang thee young baggage, disobedient wretch,
I tell thee what, get thee to Church a Thursday,
Or never after look me in the face.
Speak not, reply not, do not answer me.
My fingers itch, wife: we scarce thought us blessed,
That God had lent us but this only Child,
But now I see this one is one too much,
And that we have a curse in having her:
Out on her Hilding.

God in heaven bless her,
You are too blame my Lord to rate her so.

And why my Lady wisdom? hold your tongue,
Good Prudence, smatter with your gossip, go.

I speak no treason,
Father, O Godigoden,
May not one speak?

Peace you mumbling fool,
Utter your gravity ore a Gossips bowls
For here we need it not.

You are too hot.


Gods bread, it makes me mad:
Day, night, hour, ride, time, work, play,
Alone in company, still my care has bin
To have her matched, and having now provided
A Gentleman of Noble Parentage,
Of fair Demeanes, Youthful, and Nobly Allied,
Stuffed as they say with Honorable parts,
Proportioned as ones thought would wish a man,
And then to have a wretched puling fool,
A whining mammet, in her Fortunes tender,
To answer, I Will no^ wed, I cannot Love:
I am too young, I pray you pardon me.
But, and you will not wed, I Will pardon you.
Graze where you will, you shall not house with me:
Look to it, think on it, I do not use to jest.
Thursday is near, lay hand on heart, advise,
And you be mine, I Will give you to my Friend:
And you be not, hang, beg, straue, die in the streets,
For by my soul, I Will nere acknowledge thee,
Nor what is mine shall never do thee good:
Trust to it, bethink you, I Will not be forsworn

Is there no pity sitting in the Clouds,
That sees into the bottom of my grief?
O sweet my Mother cast me not away,
Delay this marriage, for a month, a week,
Or if you do not, make the Bridal bed
In that dim^ Monument where Tybalt lies.

Talk not to me, for I Will not speak a word,
Do as thou will, for I have done with thee.

O God!
O Nurse, how shall this be prevented?
My Husband is on earth, my faith in heaven,
How shall that faith return again to earth,
Unless that Husband send it me from heaven,
By leaving earth? Comfort me, counsel me:
Hlacke, alack* that heaven should practice stratagems
Upon so soft a subject as my self.
What say thou? have thou not a word of joy?
Some comfort Nurse.

Faith here it is,
Romeo is banished, and all the world to nothing,
That he dares nere come back to challenge you:
Or if he do, it needs must be by stealth.
Then since the case so stands as now it does,
I think it best you married with the County,
O he is a Lovely Gentleman:
Romeos a dish-clout to him: an Eagle Madam
Has not so green, so quick, so fair an eye
As Paris has, beshrow my very heart,
I think you are happy in this second match,
For it excels your first: or if it did not,
Your first is dead, or 'twere as good he were,
As living here and you no use of him.

Speak thou from thy heart?


And from my soul too,
Or else beshrew them both.

Amen.


What?


Well, thou have comforted me marue'lous much,
Go in, and tell my Lady I am gone,
Having displeased my Father, to Lawrence Cell,
To make confession, and to be absolu'd.

Marry I will, and this is wisely done.


Ancient damnation, O most wicked fiend!
It is more sin to wish me thus forsworn,
Or to dispraise my Lord with that same tongue
Which she has praised him with above compare,
So many thousand times? Go Counselor,
Thou and my bosom henchforth shall be twain:
I Will to the Friar to know his remedy,
If all else fail, my self have power to die.

On Thursday sir? the time is very short.


My Father Capulet will have it so,
And I am nothing slow to slack his have.

You say you do not know the Ladies mind?
Uneven is the course, I like it not.

Immoderately she weeps for Tybalis death,
And therefore have I little talk of Love,
For Venus smiles not in a house of tears.
Now sir, her Father counts it dangerous
That she does give her sorrow so much sway:
And in his wisdom, hasts our marriage,
To stop the inundation of her tears,
Which too much minded by her self alone,
May be put from her by society.
Now do you know the reason of this have?

I would I knew not why it should be slow'd.
Look sir, here comes the Lady toward my Cell.

Happily met, my Lady and my wife.


That may be sir, when I may be a wife.


That may be, must be Love, on Thursday next.


What must be shall be.


That Is a certain text.


Come you to make confession to this Father?


To answer that, I should confess to you.


Do not deny to him, that you Love me.


I will confess to you that I Love him.


So will ye, I am sure that you Love me.


If I do so, it will be of more price,
Benig spoke behind your back, then to your face.

Poor soul, thy face is much abused with tears.


The tears have got small victory by that:
For it was bad enough before their spite.

Thou wrong'st it more then tears with that report.


That is no slander sir, which is a truth,
And what I spoke, I spoke it to thy face.

Thy face is mine, and thou have slaundred it.


It may be so, for it is not mine own.
Are you at leisure, Holy Father now,
Or shall I come to you at evening Mass?

My leisure serves me pensive daughter now.
My Lord you must entreat the time alone.

Godsheild: I should disturb Devotion,
Juliet, on Thursday early will I rowse ye,
Till then adue, and keep this holy kiss.

O shut the door, and when thou have done so,
Come weep with me, past hope, past care, past help.

O Juliet, I already know thy grief,
It streams me past the compass of my wits:
I hear thou must and nothing may prorogue it,
On Thursday next be married to this County.

Tell me not Friar that thou hear of this,
Unless thou tell me how I may prevent it:
If in thy wisdom, thou can give no help,
Do thou but call my resolution wise,
And with' his knife, I Will help it presently.
God joined my heart, and Romeos, thou our hands,
And ere this hand by thee to Romeo sealed:
Shall be the Labell to another Deed,
Or my true heart with treacherous revolt,
Turn to another, this shall slay them both:
Therefore out of thy long expetien'st time,
Give me some present counsel, or behold
Twixt my extremes and me, this bloody knife
Shall play the vmpeere, arbitrating that,
Which the commission of thy years and art,
Could to no issue of true honor bring:
Be not so long to speak, I long to die,
If what thou speak, speak not of remedy.

Hold Daughter, I do spy a kind of hope,
Which craves as desperate an execution,
As that is desperate which we would prevent.
If rather then to marry County Paris
Thou have the strength of will to stay thy self,
Then is it likely thou will undertake
A thinglike death to chide away this shame,
That coap'st with death himself, to escape fro it:
And if thou dare, I Will give thee remedy.

Oh bid me leap, rather then marry Paris,
From of the Battlements of any Tower,
Or walk in theeuish ways, or bid me lurk
Where Serpents are: chain me with roaring Bears
Or hide me nightly in a Charnell house,
Orecouered quite with dead men's rattling bones,
With reckie shankes and yellow chapels sculls:
Or bid me go into a new made grave,
And hide me with a dead man in his grave,
Things that to hear them told, have made me tremble,
And I will do it without fear or doubt,
To live an unstained wife to my sweet Love.

Hold then: go home, be merry* give consent,
To marry Paris: wensday is to morrow,
To morrow night look that thou lie alone,
Let not thy Nurse lie with thee in thy Chamber:
Take thou this Violl being then in bed,
And this distilling liquor drink thou off,
When presently through all thy veins shall run,
A cold and drowsy humor: for no pulse
Shall keep his native progress, but surcease:
No warmth, no breath shall testify thou live,
The Roses in thy lips and cheeks shall fade
To many ashes, the eyes windows fall
Like death when he shut up the day of life:
Each part deprived of supple government,
Shall stiff and stark, and cold appear like death,
And in this borrowed likeness of shrunk death
Thou shall continue two and forty hours,
And then awake, as from a pleasant sleep.
Now when the Bridegroom in the morning comes,
To rowse thee from thy bed, there art thou dead:
Then as the manner of our country is,
In thy best Robes vncouer'd on the Beer,
Be borne to burial in thy kindreds grave:
Thou shall be borne to that same ancient vault,
Where all the kindred of the Capulets lie,
In the mean time against thou shall awake,
Shall Romeo by my Letters know our drift,
And hither shall he come, and that very night
Shall Romeo bear thee hence to Mantua.
And this shall free thee from this present shame,
If no inconstant toy nor womanish fear,
Abate thy valor in the acting it.

Give me, give me, O tell not me ofcare.


Hold get you gone, be strong and prosperous:
In this resolve, I Will send a Friar with speed
To Mantua with my Letters to thy Lord.

Love give me strength,
And strength shall help afford:
Farewell dear father.

So many guests inuit as here are writ,
Sirrah, go hire me twenty cunning Cooks.

You shall have none ill sir, for I Will try if they can lick their fingers.


How can thou try them so?


Marry sir, it is an ill Cook that cannot lick his own fingers: therefore he
that cannot lick his fingers goes not with me


Go be gone, we shall be much unfurnished for this time: what is my Daughter
gone to Friar Lawrence


I forsooth.


Well he may chance to do some good on her,
A peevish selfe-wild harlotry it is.

See where she comes from shrift
With merry look.

How now my headstrong,
Where have you bin gadding?

Where I have learnt me to repent the sin
Of disobedient opposition:
To you and your behests, and am enioyn'd
By holy Lawrence, to fall prostrate here,
To beg your pardon: pardon I beseech you,
Henceforward I am ever ruled by you.

Send for the County, go tell him of this,
I Will have this knot knit up to morrow morning.

I met the youthful Lord at Lawrence Cell,
And gave him what becomed Love I might,
Not stepping ore the bounds of modesty.

Why I am glad on it, this is well, stand up,
This is as't should be, let me see the County:
I marry go I say, and fetch him hither.
Now before God, this reueren'd holy Friar,
All our whole City is much bound to him.

Nurse will you go with me into my Closet,
To help me sort such needful ornaments,
As you think fit to furnish me to morrow?

No not till Thursday, there is time enough.


Go Nurse, go with her,
We Will to Church to morrow.

We shall be short in our provision,
It Is now near night.

Tush, I will stir about,
And all things shall be well, I warrant thee wife:
Go thou to Juliet, help to deckevp her,
I Will not to bed to night, let me alone:
I Will play the huswife for this once. What ho?
They are all forth, well I will walk my self
To County Paris, to prepare him up
Against to morrow, my heart is wondrous light,
Since this same way-ward Gyrle is so reclaimed.

I those attires are best, but gentle Nurse
I pray thee leave me to my self to night:
For I have need of many Orysons,
To move the heavens to smile upon my state,
Which well thou know, is cross and full of sin.

What are you busy ho? need you my help?


No Madam, we have cul'd such necessaries
As are behoouefull for our state to morrow:
So please you, let me now be left alone;
And let the Nurse this night sit up with you,
For I am sure, you have your hands full all,
In this so sudden business.

Goodnight.
Get thee to bed and rest, for thou have need.

Farewell:
God knows when we shall meet again.
I have a faint cold fear thrills through my veins,
That almost freezes up the heat of fire:
I Will call them back again to comfort me.
Nurse, what should she do here?
My dismal Scene, I needs must act alone:
Come Vial, what if this mixture do not work at all?
Shall I be married then to morrow morning?
No, no, this shall forbid it. Lie thou there,
What if it be a poison which the Friar
Subtly has ministered to have me dead,
Least in this marriage he should be dishonored,
Because he married me before to Romeo?
I fear it is, and yet me thinks it should not,
For he has still been tried a holy man.
How, if when I am laid into the Tomb,
I wake before the time that Romeo
Come to redeem me? There Is a fearful point:
Shall I not then be stifled in the Vault?
To whose foul mouth no health some air breaths in,
And there die strangled ere my Romeo comes.
Or if I live, is it not very like,
The horrible conceit of death and night,
Together with the terror of the place,
As in a Vaulte, an ancient receptacle,
Where for these many hundred years the bones
Of all my buried Ancestors are packt,
Where bloody Tybalt, yet but green in earth,
Lies festring in his shrowed, where as they say,
At some hours in the night, Spirits resort:
Alack, alack, is it not like that I
So early waking, what with loathsome smells,
And shrikes like Mandrakes torn out of the earth,
That living mortals hearing them, run mad.
O if I walk, shall I not be distraught,
Environed with all these hidious fears,
And madly play with my forefathers joints?
And pluck the mangled Tybalt from his shrowed?
And in this rage, with some great kinsmans bone,
As (with a club) dash out my desperate brains.
O look, me thinks I see my Cozins Ghost,
Seeking out Romeo that did spit his body
Upon my Rapiers point: stay Tybalt, stay;
Romeo, Romeo, Romeo, here is drink: I drink to thee.

Hold,
Take these keys, and fetch more spices Nurse.

They call for Dates and Quinces in the Pastrie.


Come, stir, stir, stir,
The second Cock has Crow'd,
The Curphew Bell has rung, it is three a clock:
Look to the bakte meats, good Angelica,
Spare not for cost.

Go you Cot-queane, go,
Get you to bed, faith you will be sick to morrow
For this nights watching.

No not a whit: what? I have watched ere now
All night for less cause, and nere been sick.

I you have bin a Mouse-hunt in your time,
But I will watch you from such watching now.

A jealous hood, a jealous hood,
Now fellow, what there?

Things for the Cook sir, but I know not what.


Make have, make have, sirrah, fetch drier Logs.
Call Peter, he will show thee where they are.

I have a head sir, that will find out logs,
And never trouble Peter for the matter.

Mass and well said, a merry horson, ha,
Thou shall be loggerhead; good Father, it is day.
The County will be here with Music straight,
For so he said he would, I hear him near,
Nurse, wife, what ho? what Nurse I say?
Go waken Juliet, go and trim her up,
I Will go and chat with Paris: hie, make have,
Make have, the Bridegroom, he is come already:
Make have I say.

Mistress, what Mistress? Juliet? Fast I warrant her she.
Why Lamb, why Lady? fie you sluggabed,
Why Love I say? Madam, sweet heart: why Bride?
What not a word? You take your peniworths now.
Sleep for a week, for the next night I warrant
The County Paris has set up his rest,
That you shall rest but little, God forgive me:
Marry and Amen: how sound is she a sleep?
I must needs wake her: Madam, Madam, Madam,
I, let the County take you in your bed,
Heel fright you up in faith. Will it not be?
What dressed, and in your clothes, and down again?
I must needs wake you: Lady, Lady, Lady?
Alas, alas, help, help, my Ladies dead,
Oh weladay, that ever I was borne,
Some Aqua-vitae ho, my Lord, my Lady?

What noise is here?


O lamentable day.


What is the matter?


Look, look, oh heavy day.


O me, O me, my Child, my only life:
Revive, look up, or I will die with thee:
Help, help, call help.

For shame bring Juliet forth, her Lord is come.


She Is dead: deceast, she is dead: alack the day.


Alack the day, she is dead, she is dead, she is dead.


Ha? Let me see her: out alas she is cold,
Her blood is settled and her joints are stiff:
Life and these lips have long been sep erated:
Death lies on her like an untimely frost
Upon the swetest flower of all the field.

O Lamentable day!


O woeful time.


Death that has taken her hence to make me wail,
Ties up my tongue, and will not let me speak.

Come, is the Bride ready to go to Church?


Ready to go, but never to return.
O Son, the night before thy wedding day,
Has death lain with thy wife: there she lies,
Flower as she was, deflowred by him.
Death is my Son in-law, death is my Heir,
My Daughter he has wedded, I will die,
And leave him all life living, all is deaths.

Have I thought long to see this mornings face,
And does it give me such a sight as this?

Accur'st, unhappy, wretched hateful day,
Most miserable hour, that ere time saw
In lasting labor of his Pilgrimage.
But one poor one, one poor and loving Child,
But one thing to rejoice and solace in,
And cruel death has caught it from my sight.

O woe, O woeful, woeful, woeful day,
Most lamentable day, most woeful day,
That ever, ever, I did yet behold.
O day, O day, O day, O hateful day,
Never was seen so black a day as this:
O woeful day, O woeful day.

Beguild, divorced, wronged, spighted, slain,
Most detestable death by thee beguiled,
By cruel, cruel thee, quite overthrown:
O love* O life; not life, but love in death.

Despised, distressed, hated, martir'd, killed,
Uncomfortable time, why came thou now
To murder, murder, our solemnity?
O Child, O Child; my soul, and not my Child,
Dead art thou, alack my Child is dead,
And with my Child, my joys are buried.

Peace ho for shame, confusions: Care lives not
In these confusions, heaven and your self
Had part in this fair Maid, now heaven has all,
And all the better is it for the Maid:
Your part in her, you could not keep from death,
But heaven keeps his part in eternal life:
The most you sought was her promotion,
For 'twas your heaven, she should be aduan'st,
And weep ye now, seeing she is aduan'st,
Above the Clouds, as high as Heaven it self?
O in this love, you love your Child so ill,
That you run mad, seeing that she is well:
She Is not well married, that lives married long,
But she is best married, that dies married young.
Dry up your tears, and stick your Rosemarie
On this fair Coarse, and as the custom is,
And in her best array bear her to Church:
For though some Nature bids all us lament,
Yet Natures tears are Reasons merriment.

All things that we ordained Festival,
Turn from their office to black Funeral:
Our instruments to melancholy Bells,
Our wedding cheer, to a sad burial Feast:
Our solemn Hymns, to sullen Dyrges change:
Our Bridal flowers serve for a buried Coarse:
And all things change them to the contrary.

Sir go you in; and Madam, go with him,
And go sir Paris, every one prepare
To follow this fair Coarse unto her grave:
The heavens do lowre upon you, for some ill:
Move them no more, by crossing their high will.

Faith we may put up our Pipes and be gone.


Honest good fellows* Ah put up, put up,
For well you know, this is a pitiful case.

I by my troth, the case may be amended.


Musitions, oh Musitions,
Hearts ease, hearts ease,
O, and you will have me live, play hearts ease.

Why hearts ease;


O Musitions,
Because my heart it self plays, my heart is full.

Not a dump we, it is no time to play now.


You will not then?


No.


I will then give it you soundly.


What will you give us?


No money on my faith, but the gleeke.
I will give you the Minstrell.

Then will I give you the Serving creature.


Then will I lay the serving Creatures Dagger on your pate. I will carry no
Crochets, I Will Re you, I Will Fa you, do you note me


And you Re us, and Fa us, you Note us.


Pray you put up your Dagger,
And put out your wit.
Then have at you with my wit.

I will drie-beate you with an iron wit,
And put up my iron Dagger.
Answer me like men:
When griping, griefs the heart does wound, then Music with her silver sound.
Why silver sound? why Music with her silver sound? what say you Simon
Catling

Mary sir, because silver has a sweet sound.


Pratest, what say you Hugh Rebicke?


I say silver sound, because Musitions sound for silver


Pratest to, what say you James Sound-Post?


Faith I know not what to say.


O I cry you mercy, you are the Singer.
I will say for you; it is Music with her silver sound,
Because Musitions have no gold for sounding:
Then Music with her silver sound, with speedy help does lend redress.

What a pestilent knave is this same?


Hang him Jack, come we will in here, tarry for the Mourners, and stay dinner.


If I may trust the flattering truth of sleep,
My dreams presage some joyful news at hand:
My bosoms L^sits lightly in his throne:
And all thisan day an vccustom'd spirit,
Lifts me above the ground with cheerful thoughts.
I dreamt my Lady came and found me dead,
(Strange dream that gives a dead man leave to think,)
And breathed such life with kisses in my lips,
That I revived and was an Emperor.
Ah me, how sweet is love it self possessed,
When but loves shadows are so rich in joy.
News from Verona, how now Balthazer?
Do thou not bring me Letters from the Friar?
How does my Lady? Is my Father well?
How does my Lady Juliet? that I ask again,
For nothing can be ill, if she be well.

Then she is well, and nothing can be ill.
Her body sleeps in Capels Monument,
And her immortal part with Angels live,
I saw her laid low in her kindreds Vault,
And presently took Post to tell it you:
O pardon me for bringing these ill news,
Since you did leave it for my office Sir.

Is it even so?
Then I deny you Starre^.
Thou know my lodging, get me ink and paper,
And hire Posthorses, I will hence to night.

I do beseech you sir, have patience:
Your looks are pale and wild, and do import
Some misaduenture.

Tush, thou art deceived,
Leave me, and do the thing I bid thee do.
Have thou no Letters to me from the Friar?

No my good Lord.


Mo matter: Get thee gone,
And hyre those Horses, I Will be with thee straight.
Well Juliet, I will lie with thee to night:
Lets see for means: O mischief thou art swift,
To enter in the thoughts of desperate men:
I do remember an Appothecarie,
And here abouts dwells, which late I noted
In tattred weeds, with ouerwhelming brows,
Culling of Simples, meager were hi^ looks,
Sharp misery had worn him to the bones:
And in his needy shop a Tortoyrs hung,
An Allegater stuffed, and other skins
Of ill shaped fishes, and about his shelues,
A beggarly account of empty boxes,
Green earthen pots, Bladders, and mustie seeds,
Remnants of packthred, and old cakes of Roses
Were thinly scattered, to make up a show.
Noting this penury, to my self I said,
An if a man did need a poison now,
Whose sale is persent death in Mantua,
Here lives a Caitiffe wretch would sell it him.
O this same thought did but fore-run my need,
And this same needy man must sell it me.
As I remember, this should be the house,
Being holy day, the beggars shop is shut.
What ho? Appothecarie?

Who call's so lowed?


Come hither man, I see that thou are poor,
Hold, there is forty Ducats, let me have
A dram of poison, such soon speeding gear,
As will disperse it self through all the veins,
That the life-wearie-taker may fall dead,
And that the Trunk may be discharged of breath,
As violently, as hasty powder fier'd
Does hurry from the fatal Canons womb.

Such mortal drugs I have, but Mantuas law
Is death to any he, that vtters them.

Art thou so bare and full of wretchedness,
And fear to die? Famine is in thy cheeks,
Need and opression starueth in thy eyes,
Contempt and beggary hangs upon thy back:
The world is not thy friend, not the worlds law:
The world affords no law to make thee rich.
Then be not poor, but break it, and take this.

My poverty, but not my will consents.


I pray thy poverty, and not thy will.


Put this in any liquid thing you will
And drink it off, and if you had the strength
Of twenty men, it would dispatch you straight.

There Is thy Gold,
Worse poison to men's souls,
Doing more murder in this loathsome world,
Then these poor compounds that thou may not sell.
I sell thee poison, thou have sold me none,
Farewell, buy food, and get thy self in flesh.
Come Cordial, and not poison, go with me
To Iuliets grave, for there must I use thee.

Holy Franciscan Friar, Brother, ho?


This same should be the voice of Friar John.
Welcome from Mantua, what says Romeo?
Or if his mind be writ, give me his Letter.

Going to find a bare-foote Brother out,
One of our order to associate me,
Here in this City visiting the sick,
And finding him, the Searchers of the Town
Suspecting that we both were in a house
Where the infectious pestilence did reign,
Sealed up the doors, and would not let us forth,
So that my speed to Mantua there was staid.

Who bare my Letter then to Romeo?


I could not send it, here it is again,
Nor get a messenger to bring it thee,
So fearful were they of infection.

Unhappy Fortune: by my Brotherhood
The Letter was not nice, but full of charge,
Of dear import, and the neglecting it
May do much danger: Friar John go hence,
Get me an Iron Crow, and bring it straight
Unto my Cell.

Brother I Will go and bring it thee.


Now must I to the Monument alone,
Within this three hours will fair Juliet wake,
She will be shrew me much that Romeo
Has had no notice of these accidents:
But I will write again to Mantua,
And keep her at my Cell till Romeo come,
Poor living Coarse, closed in a dead man's Tomb,

Give me thy Torch Boy, hence and stand aloft,
Yet put it out, for I would not be seen:
Under yond young Trees lay thee all along,
Holding thy ear close to the hollow ground,
So shall no foot upon the Churchyard tread,
Being loose, vnfirme with digging up of Graves,
But thou shall hear it: whistle then to me,
As signal that thou hear some thing approach,
Give me those flowers. Do as I bid thee, go.

I am almost afraid to stand alone
Here in the Churchyard, yet I will adventure.

Sweet Flower with flowers thy Bridal bed I strew:
O woe, thy Canopie is dust and stones,
Which with sweet water nightly I will dew,
Or wanting that, with tears destil'd by mones;
The obsequies that I for thee will keep,
Nightly shall be, to strew thy grave, and weep.
The Boy gives warning, something does approach,
What cursed foot wanders this ways to night,
To cross my obsequies, and true loves right?
What with a Torch? Muffle me night a while.

Give me that Mattocke, and the wrenching Iron,
Hold take this Letter, early in the morning
See thou deliver it to my Lord and Father,
Give me the light; upon thy life I charge thee,
What ere thou hear'st or see, stand all aloof,
And do not interrupt me in my course.
Why I descend into this bed of death,
Is partly to behold my Ladies face:
But chiefly to take thence from her dead finger,
A precious Ring: a Ring that I must use,
In dear employment, therefore hence be gone:
But if thou jealous do return to pry
In what I further shall intend to do,
By heaven I will tear thee joint by joint,
And strew this hungry Churchyard with thy limbs:
The time, and my intents are savage wild:
More fierce and more inexorable far,
Then empty Tigers, or the roaring Sea.

I will be gone sir, and not trouble you


So shall thou show me friendship: take thou that,
Live and be prosperous, and farewell good fellow.

For all this feign, I Will hide me here about,
His looks I fear, and his intents I doubt.

Thou detestable mawe* thou womb of death,
Gorged with the dearest morsel of the earth:
Thus I enforce thy rotten Jaws to open,
And in despite, I Will cram thee with more food.

This is that banished haughty Mountague,
That murdered my Loves Cousin; with which grief,
It is supposed the fair Creature died,
And here is come to do some villainous shame
To the dead bodies: I will apprehend him.
Stop thy unhallowed toil, vile Mountague:
Can vengeance be pursued further then death?
Condemned vallaine, I do apprehend thee.
Obey and go with me, for thou must die,

I must indeed, and therefore came I hither:
Good gentle youth, tempt not a desperate man,
Fly hence and leave me, think upon those gone,
Let them affright thee. I beseech thee Youth,
Put not an other sin upon my head,
By urging me to fury. O be gone,
By heaven I love thee better then my self,
For I come hither armed against my self:
Stay not, be gone, live, and hereafter say,
A mad man's mercy bid thee run away.

I do defy thy commisseration,
And apprehend thee for a Fellon here.

Will thou provoke me? Then have at thee Boy.


O Lord they fight, I will go call the Watch.


O I am slain, if thou be merciful,
Open the Tomb, lay me with Juliet.

In faith I will, let me peruse this face:
Mercutius kinsman, Noble County Paris,
What said my man, when my betossed soul
Did not attend him as we rode? I think
He told me Paris should have married Juliet.
Said he not so? Or did I dream it so?
Or am I mad, hearing him talk of Juliet,
To think it was so? O give me thy hand,
One, writ with me in sour misfortunes book.
I Will bury thee in a triumphant grave.
A Grave; O no, a Lantern; slaughtred Youth:
For here lies Juliet, and her beauty makes
This Vault a feasting presence full of light.
Death lie thou there, by a dead man interred.
How often when men are at the point of death,
Have they been merry? Which their Keepers call
A lightning before death? Oh how may I
Call this a lightning? O my Love, my Wife,
Death that has sucked the honey of thy breath,
Has had no power yet upon thy Beauty:
Thou are not conquered: Beauties ensign yet
Is Crymson in thy lips, and in thy cheeks,
And Deaths pale flag is not advanced there.
Tybalt, lie thou there in thy bloody sheet?
O what more favor can I do to thee,
Then with that hand that cut thy youth in twain,
To sunder his that was thy enemy?
Forgive me Cozen. Ah dear Juliet:
Why art thou yet so fair? I will believe,
Shall I believe, that vnsubstantiall death is amorous?
And that the lean abhorred Monster keeps
Thee here in dark to be his Paramour?
For fear of that, I still will stay with thee,
And never from this Palace of dym night
Depart again: come lie thou in my arms,
Here Is to thy health, where ere thou tumblest in.
O true Appothecarie!
Thy drugs are quick. Thus with a kiss I die.
Depart again; here, here will I remain,
With Worms that are thy Chambermaides: O here
Will I set up my everlasting rest:
And shake the yoke of inauspicious stars
From this world wearied flesh: Eyes look your last:
Arms take your last embrace: And lips, O you
The doors of breath, seal with a righteous kiss
A datelesse bargain to engrossing death:
Come bitter conduct, come unsavory guide,
Thou desperate Pilot, now at once run on
The dashing Rocks, thy Sea-sicke weary Bark:
Here Is to my Love. O true Appothecary:
Thy drugs are quick. Thus with a kiss I die.

St. Francis be my speed, how often to night
Have my old feet stumbled at graves? Who Is there?

Here Is one, a Friend, and one that knows you well.


Bliss be upon you. Tell me good my Friend
What Torch is yond that vainly lends his light
To grubs, and eyelesse Sculle^? As I discern,
It burns in the Capels Monument.

It does so holy sir,
And there is my Master, one that you love.

Who is it?


Romeo.


How long has he bin there?


Full half an hour.


Go with me to the Vault.


I dare not Sir.
My Master knows not but I am gone hence,
And fearfully did menace me with death,
If I did stay to look on his entents.

Stay, then I Will go alone, fears comes upon me.
O much I fear some ill unlucky thing.

As I did sleep under this young tree here,
I dreamt my master and another fought,
And that my Master slew him.

Romeo.
Alack, alack, what blood is this which stains
The stony entrance of this Sepulcher?
What mean these Masterlesse, and goarie Swords
To lie discolored by this place of peace?
Romeo, oh pale: who else? what Paris too?
And steept in blood? Ah what an vnknd hour
Is guilty of this lamentable chance?
The Lady stirs.

O comfortable Friar, where is my Lord?
I do remember well where I should be:
And there I am, where is my Romeo?

I hear some noise Lady, come from that nest
Of death, contagion, and unnatural sleep,
A greater power then we can contradict
Has thwarted our entents, come, come away,
Thy husband in thy bosom there lies dead:
And Paris too: come I Will dispose of thee,
Among a Sisterhood of holy Nuns:
Stay not to question, for the watch is coming.
Come, go good Juliet, I dare no longer stay.

Go get thee hence, for I will notuaway,
What Is here? A cup closed in my true lo^es hand?
Poison I see has bin his timelesse end
O churl, drink all? and lest no friendly drop,
To help me after, I will kiss thy lips,
Happlie some poison yet does hang on them,
To make me die with a restoratiue.
Thy lips are warm.

Lead Boy, which way?


Yea noise?
Then I Will be brief. O happy Dagger.
It Is in thy sheath, there rust and let me die.

This is the place,
There where the Torch does burn

The ground is bloody,
Search about the Churchyard.
Go some of you, who ere you find attach*
Pitiful sight, here lies the County slain,
And Iulie^t bleeding, warm and newly dead
Who here has lain these two days buried.
Go tell the Prince, run to the Capulets,
Raise up the Mountagues, some others search,
We see the ground whereon these woes do lie,
But the true ground of all these piteous woes,
We cannot without circumstance descry.

Here Is Romeo'r man,
We found him in the Churchyard.

Hold him in safety, till the Prince come hither.


Here is a Friar that trembles, sighs, and weeps
We took this Mattocke and this Spade from him,
As he was coming from this Churchyard side.

A great suspicion, stay the Friar too.


What misaduenture is so early up,
That calls our person from our mornings rest?

What should it be that they so shrike abroad?


O the people in the street cry Romeo.
Some Juliet, and some Paris, and all run
With open outcry toward out Monument.

What fear is this which startles in your ears?


Sovereign, here lies the County Paris slain,
And Romeo dead, and Juliet dead before,
Warm and new killed.

Search,
Seek, and know how, this foul murder comes.

Here is a Friar, and Slaughtered Rome^s man,
With Instruments ypon them fit to open
These dead men's Tombs.

O heaven!
O wife look how our Daughter bleedes!
This Dagger has mistaine, for lo his house
Is empty on the back of Mountague,
And is misheathed in my Daughters bosom.

O me, this sight of death, is as a Bell
That wa^nes my old age to a Sepulcher.

Come Mountague, for thou art early up
To see thy Son and Heir, now early down.

Alas my liege, my wife is dead to night,
Grief of my Sons exile has stopped her breath:
What further woe conspires against my age?

Look: and thou shall see.


O thou untaught, what manners in is this,
To press before thy Father to a grave?

Seal up the mouth of outrage for a while,
Till we can clear these ambiguities,
And know their spring, their head, their true descent,
And then will I be general of your woes,
And lead you even to death? mean time forbear,
And let mischance be slave to patience,
Bring forth the parties of suspicion.

I am the greatest, able to do least,
Yet most suspected as the time and place
Does make against me of this direful murder:
And here I stand both to impeach and purge
My self condemned, and my self excused.

Then say at once, what thou do know in this?


I will be brief, for my short date of breath
Is not so long as is a tedious tale.
Romeo there dead, was husband to that Juliet,
And she there dead, that is Romeos faithful wife:
I married them; and their stolen marriage day
Was Tybalts Doomesday: whose untimely death
Banished the new-made Bridegroom from this City:
For whom (and not for Tybalt) Juliet pinde.
You, to remove that siege of Grief from her,
Betrothed, and would have married her perforce
To County Paris. Then comes she to me,
And (with wild looks) bid me devise some means
To rid her from this second Marriage,
Or in my Cell there would she kill her self.
Then gave I her (so Tutored by my Art)
A sleeping Potion, which so took effect
As I intended, for it wrought on her
The form of death. Mean time, I writ to Romeo,
That he should hither come, as this dyre night,
To help to take her from her borrowed grave,
Being the time the Potions force should cease.
But he which bore my Letter, Friar John,
Was stayed by accident; and yesternight
Returned my Letter back. Then all alone,
At the prefixed hour of her waking,
Came I to take her from her Kindreds vault,
Meaning to keep her closely at my Cell,
Till I conveniently could send to Romeo.
But when I came (some Minute ere the time
Of her awaking) here untimely lay
The Noble Paris, and true Romeo dead.
She wakes, and I entreated her come forth,
And bear this work of Heaven, with patience:
But then, a noise did scarre me from the Tomb,
And she (too desperate) would not go with me,
But (as it seems) did violence on her self.
All this I know, and to the Marriage her Nurse is privy:
And if ought in this miscarried by my fault,
Let my old life be sacrificed, some hour before the time,
Unto the rigor of seuerest Law.

We still have known thee for a Holy man.
Where Is Romeo's man? What can he say to this?

I brought my Master news of Iuliets death,
And then in post he came from Mantua
To this same place, to this same Monument.
This Letter he early bid me give his Father,
And threatened me with death, going in the Vault,
If I departed not, and left him there.

Give me the Letter, I will look on it.
Where is the Counties Page that raised the Watch?
Sir, what made your Master in this place?

He came with flowers to strew his Ladies grave,
And bid me stand aloof, and so I did:
Anon comes one with light to open the Tomb,
And by and by my Master drew on him,
And then I ran away to call the Watch.

This Letter does make good the Friars words,
Their course of Love, the tidings of her death:
And here he writes, that he did buy a poison
Of a poor Pothecarie, and therewithal
Came to this Vault to dye, and lie with Juliet.
Where be these Enemies? Capulet, Mountague,
See what a scourge is laid upon your hate,
That Heaven finds means to kill your joys with Love;
And I, for winking at your discords too,
Have lost a brace of Kinsmen: All are punished.

O Brother Mountague, give me thy hand,
This is my Daughters ioynture, for no more
Can I demand.

But I can give thee more:
For I will raise her Statue in pure Gold,
That whiles Verona by that name is known,
There shall no figure at that Rate be set,
As that of True and Faithful Juliet.

As rich shall Romeo by his Lady ly,
Poor sacrifices of our enmity.

A glooming peace this morning with it brings,
The Sun for sorrow will not show his head;
Go hence, to have more talk of these sad things,
Some shall be pardoned, and some punished.
For never was a Story of more Woe,
Then this of Juliet, and her Romeo.


