GOod day Sir.


I am glad you are well.


I have not seen you long, how goes the World?


It wears sir, as it grows.


I that is well known:
But what particular Rarity? What strange,
Which manifold record not matches: see
Magic of Bounty, all these spirits thy power
Has coniur'd to attend.
I know the Merchant.

I know them both: the others a Ieweller.


O it is a worthy Lord.


Nay that is most fixed.


A most incomparable man, breathed as it were,
To an vntyreable and continuate goodness:
He passes.

I have a Jewel here.


O pray let us see it. For the Lord Timon, sir?


If he will touch the estimate. But for that --


When we for recompense have praised the vild,
It stains the glory in that happy Verse,
Which aptly sings the good.

It Is a good form.


And rich: here is a Water look ye.


You are rapt sir, in some work, some Dedication to the great Lord.


A thing slipped idly from me.
Our Poesy is as a Gown, which uses
From whence it is nourisht: the fire in the Flint
Shows not, till it be struck: our gentle flame
Prouokes it self, and like the current flies
Each bound it chases. What have you there?

A Picture sir: when comes your Book forth?


Upon the heels of my presentment sir.
Let Us see your piece.

It Is a good Piece.


So it is, this comes off well, and excellent.


Indifferent.


Admirable: How this grace
Speaks his own standing: what a mental power
This eye shootes forth? How big imagination
Moves in this Lip, to the dumbness of the gesture,
One might interpret.

It is a pretty mocking of the life:
Here is a touch: Is It good?

I will say of it,
It Tutors Nature, Artificial strife
Lives in these toutches, liuelier then life.

How this Lord is followed.


The Senators of Athens, happy men.


Look more.


You see this confluence, this great flood of visitors,
I have in this rough work, shaped out a man
Whom this beneath world does embrace and hug
With amplest entertainment: My free drift
Halts not particularly, but moves it self
In a wide Sea of wax, no leuell'd malice
Infects one comma in the course I hold,
But flies an Eagle flight, bold, and forth on,
Leaving no Tract behind.

How shall I understand you?


I will vnboult to you.
You see how all Conditions, how all Minds,
As well of glib and slippery Creatures, as
Of Grave and austere quality, tender down
Their services to Lord Timon: his large Fortune,
Upon his good and gracious Nature hanging,
Subdues and properties to his love and tendance
All sorts of hearts; yea, from the glasse-fac'd Flatterer
To Apemantus, that few things loues^ better
Then to abhor himself; even he drops down
The knee before him, and returns in peace
Most rich in Timons nod.

I saw them speak together.


Sir, I have upon a high and pleasant hill
Feigned Fortune to be throned.
The Base of the Mount
Is ranked with all deserts, all kind of Natures
That labor on the bosom of this Sphere,
To propagate their states; among'st them all,
Whose eyes are on this Sovereign Lady fixed,
One do I personate of Lord Timons frame,
Whom Fortune with her Iuory hand wafts to her,
Whose present grace, to present slaves and servants
Translates his Riuals.

It Is conceyu'd, to scope
This Throne, this Fortune, and this Hill me thinks
With one man becken'd from the rest below,
Bowing his head against the steepy Mount
To climb his happiness, would be well expressed
In our Condition.

Nay Sir, but hear me on:
All those which were his Fellows but of late,
Some better then his value; on the moment
Follow his strides, his Lobbies fill with tendance,
Rain Sacrificiall whisperings in his ear,
Make Sacred even his styrrop, and through him
Drink the free Air.

I marry, what of these?


When Fortune in her shift and change of mood
Spurns down her late beloved; all his Dependants
Which labored after him to the Mountains top,
Even on their knees and hand, let him sit down,
Not one accompanying his declining foot.

It Is common:
A thousand moral Paintings I can show,
That shall demonstrate these quick blows of Fortunes,
More pregnantly then words. Yet you do well,
To show Lord Timon, that mean eyes have seen
The foot above the head.

Imprisoned is he, say you?


I my good Lord, five Talents is his debt,
His means most short, his Creditors most strait:
Your Honorable Letter he desires
To those have shut him up, which failing,
Periods his comfort.

Noble Ventidius well:
I am not of that Feather, to shake off
My Friend when he must need me. I do know him
A Gentleman, that well deserves a help,
Which he shall have. I Will pay the debt, and free him.

Your Lordship ever binds him.


Commend me to him, I will send his ransom,
And being enfranchized bid him come to me;
It Is not enough to help the Feeble up,
But to support him after. Fare you well.

All happiness to your Honor.


Lord Timon, hear me speak.


Freely good Father.


Thou have a Servant named Lucilius.


I have so: What of him?


Most Noble Timon, call the man before thee.


Attends he here, or no? Lucillius.


Here at your Lordships service.


This Fellow here, L. Timon, this thy Creature,
By night frequents my house. I am a man
That from my first have been inclined to thrift,
And my estate deserves an Heir more raised,
Then one which holds a Trencher.

Well: what further?


One only Daughter have I, no Kin else,
On whom I may confer what I have got:
The Maid is fair, a' the youngest for a Bride,
And I have bred her at my dearest cost
In Qualities of the best. This man of thine
Attempts her love: I prithee (Noble Lord)
Join with me to forbid him her resort,
My self have spoke in vain.

The man is honest.


Therefore he will be Timon,
His honesty rewards him in it self,
It must not bear my Daughter.

Does she love him?


She is young and apt:
Our own precedent passions do instruct us
What leuities in youth.

Love you the Maid?


I my good Lord, and she accepts of it.


If in her Marriage my consent be missing,
I call the Gods to witness, I will choose
Mine heir from forth the Beggars of the world,
And dispossess her all.

How shall she be endowed,
If she be mated with an equal Husband?

Three Talents on the present; in future, all.


This Gentleman of mine
Has served me long:
To build his Fortune, I will strain a little,
For it is a Bond in men. Give him thy Daughter,
What you bestow, in him I Will counterpoize,
And make him weigh with her.

Most Noble Lord,
Pawn me to this your Honor, she is his.

My hand to thee,
Mine Honor on my promise.

Humbly I thank your Lordship, never may
That state or Fortune fall into my keeping,
Which is not owed to you.

Vouchsafe my Labor,
And long live your Lordship.

I thank you, you shall hear from me anon:
Go not away. What have you there, my Friend?

A piece of Painting, which I do beseech
Your Lordship to accept.

Painting is welcome.
The Painting is almost the Natural man:
For since Dishonor Traffickes with man's Nature,
He is but outside: These Pensil'd Figures are
Even such as they give out. I like your work,
And you shall find I like it; Wait attendance
Till you hear further from me.

The Gods preserve ye.


Well fare you Gentleman: give me your hand.
We must needs dine together: sir your Jewel
Has suffered under praise.

What my Lord, dispraise?


A mere saciety of Commendations,
If I should pay you for it as it is extold,
It would vnclew me quite.

My Lord, it is rated
As those which sell would give: but you well know,
Things of like value differing in the Owners,
Are prized by their Masters. Beleeu't dear Lord,
You mend the Jewel by the wearing it.

Well mocked.


No my good Lord, he speaks ye common tongue
Which all men speak with him.

Look who comes here, will you be chid?


We Will bear with your Lordship.


He Will spare none.


Good morrow to thee,
Gentle Apermantus.

Till I be gentle, stay thou for thy good morrow.
When thou art Timons dog, and these Knaves honest.

Why do thou call them Knaves, thou know them not?


Are they not Athenians?


Yes.


Then I repent not.


You know me, Apemantus?


Thou know I do, I called thee by thy name.


Thou art proud Apemantus?


Of nothing so much, as that I am not like Timon


Whether art going?


To knock out an honest Athenians brains.


That Is a deed thou't dye for.


Right, if doing nothing be death by the Law.


How like thou this picture Apemantus?


The best* for the innocence.


Wrought he not well that painted it.


He wrought better that made the Painter, and yet he is but a filthy piece of
work


Y' are a Dog.


Thy Mothers of my generation: what is she, if I be a Dog?


Wilt dine with me Apemantus?


No: I eat not Lords.


And thou should, thoud'st anger Ladies.


O they eat Lords;
So they come by great bellies.

That Is a lascivious apprehension.


So, thou apprehend'st it,
Take it for thy labor.

How do thou like this Jewel, Apemantus?


Not so well as plain-dealing, which will not cast a man a Doit.


What do thou think it is worth?


Not worth my thinking.
How now Poet?

How now Philosopher?


Thou lie.


Art not one?


Yes.


Then I lie not.


Art not a Poet?


Yes.


Then thou lie:
Look in thy last work, where thou have fegin'd him a worthy Fellow.

That Is not feigned, he is so.


Yes he is worthy of thee, and to pay thee for thy labor. He that loves to be
flattered, is worthy of th flatterer. Heavens, that I were a Lord


What would do then Apemantus?


E'ne as Apemantus does now, hate a Lord with my heart.


What thy self?


I.


Wherefore?


That I had no angry wit to be a Lord.
Art not thou a Merchant?

I Apemantus.


Traffic confound thee, if the Gods will not.


If Traffic do it, the Gods do it.


Traffickes thy God, and thy God confound thee.

What Trumpets that?


It Is Alcibiades, and some twenty Horse
All of Companionship.

Pray entertain them, give them guide to us.
You must needs dine with me: go not you hence
Till I have thankt you: when dinners done
Show me this piece* I am joyful of your sights.
Most welcome Sir.

So, so; their Aches contract, and sterue your supple joints: that there should
be small love amongst these sweet Knaves, and all this Courtesy. The strain
of man's bred out into Baboon and Monkey


Sir, you have saved my longing, and I feed
Most hungerly on your sight.

Right welcome Sir:
Ere we depart, we will share a bounteous time
In different pleasures.
Pray you let us in.

What time a day is it Apemantus?


Time to be honest.


That time serves still.


The most accursed thou that still omitst it.


Thou art going to Lord Timons Feast.


I, to see meat fill Knaves, and Wine heat fools.


Farthee well, farthee well.


Thou art a Fool to bid me farewell twice.


Why Apemantus?


Should have kept one to thy self, for I mean to give thee none.


Hang thy self.


No I will do nothing at thy bidding:
Make thy requests to thy Friend.

Away unpeaceable Dog,
Or I Will spurn thee hence.

I will fly like a dog, the heels a' the Ass.


He Is opposite to humanity.
Comes shall we in,
And ^aste Lord Timons bounty: he out-goes
The very heart of kindness.

He powers it out: Plutus the God of Gold
Is but his Steward: no meede but he repayes
Seuen-fold above it self: No gift to him,
But breeds the giver a return: exceeding
All use of quittance.

The Noblest mind he carries,
That ever governed man.

Long may he live in Fortunes. Shall we in?
I Will keep you Company.

Most honored Timon,
It has pleased the Gods to remember my Fathers age,
And call him to long peace:
He is gone happy and has left me rich:
Then, as in grateful Virtue I am bound
To your free heart, I do return those Talents
Doubled with thanks and service, from whose help
I derived liberty.

O by no means,
Honest Ventigius: You mistake my love,
I gave it freely ever, and there is none
Can truly say he gives, if he receives:
If our betters play at that game, we must not dare
To imitate them: faults that are rich are fair.

A Noble spirit.


Nay my Lords, Ceremony was but devised at first
To set a gloss on faint deeds, hollow welcomes,
Recanting goodness, sorry ere it is shown:
But where there is true friendship, there needs none,
Pray sit, more welcome are ye to my Fortunes,
Then my Fortunes to me.

My Lord, we always have confessed it.


Ho ho, confessed it? Handg'd it? Have you not?


O Apermantus, you are welcome.


No: You shall not make me welcome:
I come to have thee thrust me out of doors.

Fie, the art a churl, ye' have got a humor there
Does not become a man, it is much too blame:
They say my Lords, Irafuror breuis est,
But yond man is very angry.
Go, let him have a Table by himself:
For he does neither affect company,
Nor is he fit for it indeed.

Let me stay at thine apperill Timon,
I come to observe, I give thee warning on it.

I take no heed of thee: The art an Athenian, therefore welcome: I my self
would have no power, prithee let my meat make thee silent


I scorn thy meat, 'twould choke me: for I should nere flatter thee. Oh you
Gods! What a number of men eats Timon, and he sees 'em not? It greeues me to
see so many dip there meat in one man's blood, and all the madness is, he
cheeres them up too

I wonder men dare trust themselves with men.
Me thinks they should enuite them without knives,
Good for there meat, and safer for their lives.
There Is much example for it, the fellow that sits next him, now parts bread
with him, pledges the breath of him in a divided draught: is the readiest man
to kill him, 'Tas been* proved, if I were a huge man I should fear to drink
at meals, least they should spy my wind-pipes dangerous noates, great men
should drink with harness on their throats


My Lord in heart: and let the health go round.


Let it flow this way my good Lord.


Flow this way? A brave fellow. He keeps his tides well, those healths will
make thee and thy state look ill, Timon

Here Is that which is too weak to be a sinner,
Honest water, which nere left man in the mire:
This and my food are equals, there is no ods,
Feasts are to proud to give thanks to the Gods.
Immortal Gods, I crave no pelf,
I pray for no man but my self,
Grant I may never prove so fond,
To trust man on his Oath or Bond.
Or a Harlot for her weeping,
Or a Dog that seems asleeping,
Or a keeper with my freedom,
Or my friends if I should need 'em.
Amen.
So fall to it:
Richmen sin, and I eat root.
Much good dich thy good heart, Apermantus

Captain, Alcibiades, your hearts in the field now.


My heart is ever at your service, my Lord.


You had rather be at a breakefast of Enemies, then a dinner of Friends.


So they were bleeding new my Lord, there is no meat like 'em, I could wish my
best friend at such a Feast


Would all those Flatterers were thine Enemies then, that then thou might
kill 'em: and bid me to 'em


Might we but have that happiness my Lord, that you would once use our hearts,
whereby we might express some part of our zeales, we should think our selves
for ever perfect


Oh no doubt my good Friends, but the Gods themselves have provided that I
shall have much help from you: how had you been my Friends else. Why have you
that charitable title from thousands? Did not you chiefly belong to my heart?
I have told more of you to my self, then you can with modesty speak in your
own behalf. And thus far I confirm you. Oh you Gods (think I,) what need
we have any Friends; if we should nere have need of' em? They were the most
needless Creatures living; should we nere have use for 'em? And would most
resemble sweet Instruments hung up in Cases, that keeps there sounds to
themselves. Why I have often wished my self poorer, that I might come nearer to
you: we are borne to do benefits. And what better or properer can we call our
own, then the richer of our Friends? Oh what a precious comfort it is, to have
so many like Brothers commanding one another Fortunes. Oh joys, e'ne made
away er't can be borne: mine eyes cannot hold out wate^me thinks* to forget
their Faults. I drink to you


Thou weep'st to make them drink, Timon.


Joy had the like conception in our eyes,
And at that instant, like a babe sprung up.

Ho, ho: I laugh to think that babe a bastard.


I promise you my Lord you moved me much.


Much.


What means that Trumpe? How now?


Please you my Lord, there are certain Ladies
Most desirous of admittance.

Ladies? what are their wills?


There comes with them a forerunner my Lord, which bears that office, to
signify their pleasures


I pray let them be admitted.


Hail to thee worthy Timon and to all that of his Bounties taste: the five
best Sencesa cknowledge thee their Patron, and come freely to gratulate thy
plentiou^ bosom

There taste, touch all pleased from thy Table rise:
They only now come but to Feast thine eyes.

They Are wecome all, let 'em have kind admittance. Music make their welcome.


You see my Lord, how ample y' are beloved.


Hoyday,
What a sweep of vanity comes this way.
They dance? They are mad women,
Like Madness is the glory of this life,
As this pomp shows to a little oil and root.
We make our selves Fools, to disport our selves,
And spend our Flatteries, to drink those men,
Upon whose Age we void it up again
With poisonous Spite and Envy.
Who lives, that is not depraved, or depraues;
Who dies, that bears not one spurn to their graves
Of their Friends gift:
I should fear, those that dance before me now,
Would one day stamp upon me: 'Tas been done,
Men shut their doors against a setting Sun.

You have done our pleasures
Much grace (fair Ladies)
Set a fair fashion on our entertainment,
Which was not half so beautiful, and kind:
You have added worth vntoo't, and luster,
And entertained me with mine own device.
I am to thank you for it.

My Lord you take us even at the best.


Faith for the worst is filthy, and would not hold taking, I doubt me.


Ladies, there is an idle banquet attends you,
Please you to dispose your selves.

Most thankfully, my Lord.


Flauius.


My Lord.


The little Casket bring me hither.


Yes, my Lord. More Jewels yet?
There is no crossing him in's humor,
Else I should tell him well, y faith I should;
When all is spent, hee'ld be crossed then, and he could:
It Is pity Bounty had not eyes behind,
That man might never be wretched for his mind.

Where be our men?


Here my Lord, in readiness.


Our Horses.


O my Friends:
I have one word to say to you: Look you, my good L.
I must entreat you honor me so much,
As to advance this Jewel, accept it, and wear it,
Kind my Lord.

I am so far already in your gifts.


So are we all.


My Lord, there are certain Nobles of the Senate newly alighted, and come to
visit you


They are fairly welcome.


I beseech your Honor, vouchsafe me a word, it does concern you near.


Near? why then another time I Will hear thee.
I prithee let us be provided to show them entertainment.

I scarce know how.


May it please your Honor, Lord Lucius^
(Out of his free love) has presented to you
Four Milke-white Horses, trapt in Silver.

I shall accept them fairly: let the Presents
Be worthily entertained.
How now? What news?

Please you my Lord, that honorable Gentleman Lord Lucullus, entreats your
company to morrow, to hunt with him, and has sent your Honor two brace of
Greyhounds


I Will hunt with him,
And let them be received, not without fair Reward.

What will this come to?
He commands us to provide, and give great gifts, and all out of an empty
Coffer
Nor will he know his Purse, or yield me this,
To show him what a Beggar his heart is,
Being of no power to make his wishes good.
His promises fly so beyond his state,
That what he speaks is all in debt, he ows for every word:
He is so kind, that he now pays interest for it;
His Land's put to their Books. Well, would I were
Gently put out of Office, before I were forced out:
Happier is he that has no friend to feed,
Then such that do e'ne Enemies exceed.
I bleed inwardly for my Lord.

You do your selves much wrong,
You bate too much of your own merits.
Here my Lord, a trifle of our Love.

With more then common thanks
I will receive it.

O he is the very soul of Bounty.


And now I remember my Lord, you gave good words the other day of a Bay Courser
I rod on. It Is yours because you liked it


Oh, I beseech you pardon me, my Lord, in that.


You may take my word my Lord: I know no man can justly praise, but what he
does affect. I weighe my Friends affection with mine own: I Will tell you true,
I Will call to you


O none so welcome.


I take all, and your several visitations
So kind to heart, it is not enough to give:
Me thinks, I could deal Kingdoms to my Friends,
And nere be weary. Alcibiades,
Thou art a Soldiour, therefore sildome rich,
It comes in Charity to thee: for all thy living
Is mong'st the dead: and all the Lands thou have
Lie in a pitched field.

I, defiled Land, my Lord.


We are so virtuously bound.


And so am I to you.


So infinitely endeer'd.


All to you. Lights, more Lights.


The best of Happiness, Honor, and Fortunes
Keep with you Lord Timon.

Ready for his Friends.


What a coiles here, serving of beckes, and iutting out of bummes. I doubt
whether their Legs be worth the sums that are given for 'em

Friendships full of dregs,
Me thinks false hearts, should never have sound legs.
Thus honest Fools lay out their wealth on Curtsies.

Now Apermantus (if thou were not sullen)
I would be good to thee.

No, I Will nothing; for if I should be bribed too, there would be none left to
rail vponthee, and then thou would sin the faster. Thou give so long
Timon (I fear me) thou will give away thy self in paper shortly. What needs
these Feasts, pompes, and Vaine-glories


Nay, and you begin to rail on Society once, I am sworn not to give regard
to you. Farewell, and come with better Music


So: Thou will not hear me now, thou shall not then. I Will lock thy heaven
from thee
Oh that men's ears should be
To Counsel deaf, but not to Flattery.

And late five thousand: to Varro and to Isidore
He owes nine thousand, besides my former sum,
Which makes it five and twenty. Still in motion
Of raging waste? It cannot hold, it will not.
If I want Gold, steal but a beggars Dog,
And give it Timon, why the Dog coins Gold.
If I would sell my Horse, and buy twenty more
Better then he; why give my Horse to Timon.
Ask nothing, give it him, it Foles me straight
And able Horses: No Porter at his gate,
But rather one that smiles, and still inuites
All that pass by. It cannot hold, no reason
Can sound his state in safety. Caphis hoa,
Caphis I say.

Here sir, what is your pleasure.


Get on your cloak, and have you to Lord Timon,
Importune him for my Moneys, be not ceast
With slight denial; nor then silenced, when
Commend me to your Master, and the Cap
Plays in the right hand, thus: but tell him,
My Uses cry to me; I must serve my turn
Out of mine own, his days and times are past,
And my reliances on his fracted dates
Have smit my credit. I love, and honor him,
But must not break my back, to heal his finger.
Immediate are my needs, and my relief
Must not be tossed and turned to me in words,
But find supply immediate. Get you gone,
Put on a most importunate aspect,
A visage of demand: for I do fear
When every Feather sticks in his own wing,
Lord Timon will be left a naked gull,
Which flashes now a Phoenix, get you gone.

I go sir.


I go sir?
Take the Bonds along with you,
And have the dates in. Come.

I will Sir.


Go.


No care, no stop, so senseless of expense,
That he will neither know how to maintain it,
Nor cease his flow of Riot. Takes no account
How things go from him, nor resume no care
Of what is to continue: never mind,
Was to be so unwise, to be so kind.
What shall be done, he will not hear, till feel:
I must be round with him, now he comes from hunting.
Fie, fie, fie, fie.

Good even Varro: what, you come for money?


Is It not your business too?


It is, and yours too, Isidore?


It is so.


Would we were all discharged.


I fear it,


Here comes the Lord.


So soon as dinners done, we will forth again
My Alcibiades. With me, what is your will?

My Lord, here is a note of certain dues.


Dues? whence are you?


Of Athens here, my Lord.


Go to my Steward.


Please it your Lordship, he has put me off
To the succession of new days this month:
My Master is awaked by great Occasion,
To call upon his own, and humbly prays you,
That with your other Noble parts, you will suite,
In giving him his right.

Mine honest Friend,
I prithee but repair to me next morning.

Nay, good my Lord.


Contain thy self, good Friend.


One Varroes servant, my good Lord.


From Isidore, he humbly prays your speedy payment.


If you did know my Lord, my Masters wants.


'Twas due on forfeyture my Lord, six weeks, and past.


Your Steward puts me off my Lord, and I
Am sent expressly to your Lordship.

Give me breath:
I do beseech you good my Lords keep on,
I Will wait upon you instantly. Come hither: pray you
How goes the world, that I am thus encountered
With clamorous demands of debt, broken Bonds,
And the detention of long since due debts
Against my Honor?

Please you Gentlemen,
The time is vnagreeable to this business:
Your importunacie cease, till after dinner,
That I may make his Lordship understand
Wherefore you are not paid.

Do so my Friends, see them well entertained.


Pray draw near.


Stay, stay, here comes the Fool with Apemantus, let us ha some sport with 'em.


Hang him, he will abuse us.


A plague upon him dog.


How do Fool?


Do Dialogue with thy shadow?


I speak not to thee.


No it is to thy self. Come away.


There Is the Fool hangs on your back already.


No thou stand'st single, the art not on him yet.


Where Is the Fool now?


He last asked the question. Poor Rogues, and Usurers men, Bauds between Gold
and want


What are we Apemantus?


Asses.


Why?


That you ask me what you are, and do not know your selves. Speak to 'em Fool.


How do you Gentlemen?


Gramercies good Fool:
How does your Mistress?

She Is e'ne setting on water to scaled such Chickens as you are. Would we could
see you at Corinth


Good, Gramercy.


Look you, here comes my Masters Page.


Why how now Captain? what do you in this wise Company.
How do thou Apermantus?

Would I had a Rod in my mouth, that I might answer thee profitably.


Prithee Apemantus read me the superscription of these Letters, I know not
which is which


Can not read?


No.


There will little Learning dye then that day thou art hanged. This is to Lord
Timon, this to Alcibiades. Go thou was it borne a Bastard, and thou't dye a Bawd


Thou was it whelpt a Dog, and thou shall famish a Dogs death.
Answer not, I am gone.

E'ne so thou out-runst Grace,
Fool I will go with you to Lord Timons.

Will you leave me there?


If Timon stay at home.
You three serve three Usurers?

I would they served us.


So would I:
As good a trick as ever Hangman served Thief.

Are you three Usurers men?


I Fool.


I think no Usurer, but has a Fool to his Servant. My Mistress is one, and I
am her Fool: when men come to borrow of your Masters, they approach sadly, and
go away merry: but they enter my Masters house merrily, and go away sadly. The
reason of this


I could render one.


Do it then, that we may account thee a Whoremaster, and a Knave, which
notwithstanding thou shall be no less esteemed


What is a Whoremaster Fool?


A Fool in good clothes, and something like thee. It Is a spirit, sometime to
appears like a Lord, sometime like a Lawyer, sometime like a Philosopher, with
two stones more then is artificial one. He is very often like a Knight; and
generally, in all shapes that man goes up and down in, from fourscore to
thirteen, this spirit walks in


Thou art not altogether a Fool.


Nor thou altogether a Wise man,
As much foolerie as I have, so much wit thou lack'st.

That answer might have become Apemantus.


Aside, aside, here comes Lord Timon.


Come with me (Fool) come.


I do not always follow Lover, elder Brother, aad Woman, sometime the
Philosopher


Pray you walk en eere,
I Will speak with you anon.

You make me meruell wherefore ere this time
Had you not fully laid my state before me,
That I might so have rated my expense
As I had leave of means.

You would not hear me:
At many leysures I propose.

Go too:
Perchance some single vantages you took,
When my indisposition put you back,
And that unaptness made your minister
Thus to excuse your self.

O my good Lord,
At many times I brought in my accounts,
Laid them before you, you would throw them off,
And say you sound them in mine honesty,
When for some trifling present you have bid me
Return so much, I have shook my head, and wept:
Yea against the Authority of manners, prayed you
To hold your hand more close: I did endure
Not sildome, nor no flight checkes, when I have
Prompted you in the ebb of your estate,
And your great flow of debts; my loved Lord,
Though you hear now (too late) yet nowes a time,
The greatest of your having, lackes a half,
To pay your present debts.

Let all my Land be sold.


It Is all engaged, some forfeyted and gone,
And what remains will hardly stop the mouth
Of present dues; the future comes apace:
What shall defend the interim, and at length
How goes our reckoning?

To Lacedemon did my Land extend.


O my good Lord, the world is but a word,
Were it all yours, to give it in a breath,
How quickly were it gone.

You tell me true.


If you suspect my Husbandry or Falsehood,
Call me before the exactest Auditors,
And set me on the proof. So the Gods bless me,
When all our Offices have been oppressed
With riotous Feeders, when our Vaults have wept
With drunken spilth of Wine; when every room
Has blazed with Lights, and braid with Minstrelsie,
I have retired me to a wastefull cock,
And set mine eyes at flow.

Prithee no more.


Heavens have I said the bounty of this Lord:
How many prodigal bits have Slaves and Pezants
This night englutted: who is not Timons,
What heart, head, sword, force, means, but is L. Timons:
Great Timon, Noble, Worthy, Royal Timon:
Ah, when the means are gone, that buy this praise,
The breath is gone, whereof this praise is made:
Feast won, fast lost; one cloud of Winter showers,
These flies are coucht.

Come sermon me no further.
No villainous bounty yet has past my heart;
Unwisely, not ignobly have I given.
Why do thou weep, can thou the conscience lack,
To think I shall lack friends: secure thy heart,
If I would broach the vessels of my love,
And try the argument of hearts, by borrowing,
Men, and men's fortunes could I frankely use
As I can bid thee speak.

Assurance bless your thoughts.


And in some sort these wants of mine are crowned,
That I account them blessings. For by these
Shall I try Friends. You shall perceive
How you mistake my Fortunes:
I am wealthy in my Friends.
Within there, Flauius, Seruilius?

My Lord, my Lord.


I will dispatch you severally.

You to Lord Lucius, to Lord Lucullus you, I hunted with his Honor to day; you
to Sempronius; commend me to their loves; and I am proud say, that my occasions
have found time to use 'em toward a supply of money: let the request be fifty
Talents


As you have said, my Lord.


Lord Lucius and Lucullus? Humh.


Go you sir to the Senators;
Of whom, even to the States best health; I have
Deserved this Hearing: bid 'em send of the instant
A thousand Talents to me.

I have been bold
(For that I knew it the most general way)
To them, to use your Signet, and your Name,
But they do shake their heads, and I am here
No richer in return.

Is It true? Cannot be?


They answer in a joint and corporate voice,
That now they are at fall, want Treature cannot
Do what they would, are sorry: you are Honorable,
But yet they could have wished, they know not,
Something has been amiss; a Noble Nature
May catch a wrench; would all were well; it is pity,
And so intending other serious matters,
After distastefull looks; and these hard Fractions
With certain halfe-caps, and cold moving nods,
They froze me into Silence.

You Gods reward them:
Prithee man look cheerely. These old Fellows
Have their ingratitude in them Hereditary:
Their blood is cak'd, it is cold, it sildome flows,
It Is lack of kindly warmth, they are not kind;
And Nature, as it grows again toward earth,
Is fashioned for the journey, dull and heavy.
Go to Ventiddius (prithee be not sad,
Thou art true, and honest; Ingeniously I speak,
No blame belongs to thee:) Ventiddius lately
Buried his Father, by whose death he is stepped
Into a great estate: When he was poor,
Imprisoned, and in scarsitie of Friends,
I cleared him with five Talents: Greet him from me,
Bid him suppose, some good necessity
Touches his Friend, which craves to be remembered
With those five Talents; that had, giue't these Fellows
To whom it is instant due. Neu'r speak, or think,
That Timons fortunes among his Friends can sink.

I would I could not think it:
That thought is Bounties Foe;
Being free it self, it thinks all others so.

I have told my Lord of you, he is coming down to you.


I thank you Sir.


Here Is my Lord.


One of Lord Timons men? A Gift I warrant. Why this hits right: I dreampt of a
Silver Basin and Ewre to night. Flaminius, honest Flaminius, you are very
respectively welcome sir. Fill me some Wine. And how does that Honorable,
Complete, Free-hearted Gentleman of Athens, thy very bountiful good Lord and
Master


His health is well sir.


I am right glad that his health is well sir: and what have thou there under
thy Cloak, pretty Flaminius


Faith, nothing but an empty box Sir, which in my Lords behal^ I come to
entreat your Honor to supply: who having great and instant occasion to use
fifty Talents, has sent to your Lordship to furnish him: nothing doubting
your present assistance therein


La, la, la, la: Nothing doubting says he? Alas good Lord, a Noble Gentleman
it is, if he would not keep so good a house. Many a time and often I ha dined
with him, and told him on it, and come again to supper to him of purpose, to
have him spend less, and yet he would embrace no counsel, take no warning by
my coming, every man has his fault, and honesty is his. I ha told him on it,
but I could nere get him from't


Please your Lordship, here is the Wine.


Flaminius, I have noted thee always wise.
Here Is to thee.

Your Lordship speaks your pleasure.


I have observed thee always for a towardlie prompt spirit, give thee thy due,
and one that knows what belongs to reason; and can use the time well, if the
time use thee well. Good parts in thee; get you gone sirrah. Draw nearer honest
Flaminius. Thy Lords a bountiful Gentleman, but thou art wise, and thou
know well enough (although thou come to me) that this is no time to lend
money, especially upon bare friendship without security. Here Is three
Solidares for thee, good Boy wink at me, and say thou saw me not. Fare
thee well


Is It possible the world should so much differ,
And we alive that lived? Fly damned baseness
To him that worships thee.

Ha? Now I see thou art a Fool, and sit for thy Master.


May these add to the number yt may scald thee:
Let moulten Coin be thy damnation,
Thou disease of a friend, and not himself:
Has friendship such a faint and milkie heart,
It turns in less then two nights? O you Gods!
I feel my Masters passion. This Slave unto his Honor,
Has my Lords meat in him:
Why should it thrive, and turn to Nutriment,
When he is turned to poison?
O may Diseases only work upon it:
And when he is sick to death, let not that part of Nature
Which my Lord paid for, be of any power
To expel sickness, but prolong his hour.

Who the Lord Timon? He is my very good friend and an Honorable Gentleman.


We know him for no less, though we are but strangers to him. But I can tell
you one thing my Lord, and which I hear from common rumors, now Lord Timons
happy hours are done and past, and his estate shrinkes from him


Fie no, do not believe it: he cannot want for money.


But believe you this my Lord, that not long ago, one of his men was with the
Lord Lucullus, to borrow so many Talents, nay urged extremely for it, and showed
what necessity belonged to it, and yet was deny'de


How?


I tell you, deny'de my Lord.


What a strange case was that? Now before the Gods I am ashamed on it. Denied
that honorable man? There was very little Honor showed in it. For my own
part, I must needs confess, I have received some small kindnesses from him,
as Money, Plate, Jewels, and such like Trifles; nothing comparing to his: yet
had he mistook him, and sent to me, I should never have denied his Occasion
so many Talents


See, by good hap yonder is my Lord, I have swet to see his Honor. My Honored
Lord


Seruilius? You are kindly met sir. Farthewell, commend me to thy Honorable
virtuous Lord, my very exquisite Friend


May it please your Honor, my Lord has sent --


Ha? what has he sent? I am so much endeered to that Lord; he is ever sending:
how shall I thank him think thou? And what has he sent now


Has only sent his present Occasion now my Lord: requesting your Lordship to
supply his instant use with so many Talents


I know his Lordship is but merry with me,
He cannot want fifty five hundred Talents.

But in the mean time he wants less my Lord.
If his occasion were not virtuous,
I should not urge it half so faithfully.

Do thou speak seriously Seruilius?


Upon my soul, it is true Sir.


What a wicked Beast was I to disfurnish my self against such a good time, when
I might ha shown my self Honorable? How unluckily it happened, that I should
Purchase the day before for a little part, and undo a great deal of Honor?
Seruilius* now before the Gods I am not able to do (the more beast I say) I was
sending to use Lord Timon my self, these Gentlemen can witness; but I would
not for the wealth of Athens I had done't now. Commend me bountifully to his
good Lordship, and I hope his Honor will conceive the fairest of me, because I
have no power to be kind. And tell him this from me, I count it one of my
greatest afflictions say, that I cannot pleasure such an Honorable Gentleman.
Good Seruilius, will you befriend me so far, as to use mine own words to
him


Yes sir, I shall.


I Will look you out a good turn Seruilius.
True as you said, Timon is shrunk indeed,
And he that is once deny'de, will hardly speed.

Do you observe this Hostilius?


I, to well.


Why this is the worlds soul,
And just of the same piece
Is every Flatterers sport: who can call him his Friend
That dips in the same dish? For in my knowing
Timon has bin this Lords Father,
And kept his credit with his purse:
Supported his estate, nay Timons money
Has paid his men their wages. He never drinks,
But Timons Silver treads upon his Lip,
And yet, oh see the monstrousness of man,
When he looks out in an ungrateful shape;
He does deny him (in respect of his)
What charitable men afford to Beggars.

Religion groans at it.


For mine own part, I never tasted Timon in my life
Nor came any of his bounties over me,
To mark me for his Friend. Yet I protest,
For his right Noble mind, illustrious Virtue,
And Honorable Carriage,
Had his necessity made use of me,
I would have put my wealth into Donation,
And the best half should have returned to him,
So much I love his heart: But I perceive,
Men must learn now with pity to dispense,
For Policy sits above Conscience.

Must he needs trouble me in it? Hum.
Above all others?
He might have tried Lord Lucius, or Lucullus,
And now Ventidgius is wealthy too,
Whom he redeemed from prison. All these
Owes their estates unto him.

My Lord,
They have all bin touched, and found Base-Mettle,
For they have all denied him.

How? Have they deny'de him?
Has Ventidgius and Lucullus deny'de him,
And does he send to me? Three? Humh?
It shows but little love, or judgment in him.
Must I be his last Refuge? His Friends (like Physicians)
Thrive, give him over: Must I take the Cure upon me?
Has much disgraced me in it, I Am angry at him,
That might have known my place. I see no sense for it,
But his Occasions might have wooed me first:
For in my conscience, I was the first man
That ere received gift from him.
And does he think so backwardly of me now,
That I Will requite it last? No:
So it may prove an Argument of Laughter
To the rest, and amongst Lords be thought a Fool:
I Would rather then the worth of thrice the sum,
Had sent to me first, but for my minds sake:
I Would such a courage to do him good. But now return,
And with their faint reply, this answer join;
Who bates mine Honor, shall not know my Coin.

Excellent: Your Lordships a goodly Villain: the devil knew not what he did,
when he made man Politic; he crossed himself by it: and I cannot think, but
in the end, the Villainies of man will set him clear. How fairly this Lord
strives to appear foul? Takes Virtuous Copies to be wicked: like those, that
under hot ardent zeal, would set whole Realms on fire, of such a nature is
his politic love

This was my Lords best hope, now all are fled
Save only the Gods. Now his Friends are dead,
Doors that were never acquainted with their Wards
Many a bounteous year, must be employed
Now to guard sure their Master:
And this is all a liberal course allows,
Who cannot keep his wealth, must keep his house.

Well met, goodmorrow Titus and Hortensius


The like to you kind Varro.


Lucius, what do we meet together?


I, and I think one business does command us all.
For mine is money.

So is theirs, and ours.


And sir Philotus too.


Good day at once.


Welcome good Brother.
What do you think the hour?

Laboring for Nine.


So much?


Is not my Lord seen yet?


Not yet.


I wonder on it, he was wont to shine at seven.


I, but the days are waxt shorter with him:
You must consider, that a Prodigal course
Is like the Suns, but not like his recouerable, I fear:
It Is deepest Winter in Lord Timons purse, that is:
One may reach deep enough, and yet find little.

I am of your fear, for that.


I Will show you how to observe a strange event:
Your Lord sends now for Money?

Most true, he does.


And he wears Jewels now of Timons gift,
For which I wait for money.

It is against my heart.


Mark how strange it shows,
Timon in this, should pay more then he owes:
And e'ne as if your Lord should wear rich Jewels,
And send for money for 'em.

I Am weary of this Charge,
The Gods can witness:
I know my Lord has spent of Timons wealth,
And now Ingratitude, makes it worse then stealth.

Yes, mine is three thousand Crowns:
What Is yours?

Five thousand mine.


It Is much deep, and it should seem by the sum
Your Masters confidence was above mine,
Else surely his had equaled.

One of Lord Timons men.


Flaminius? Sir, a word: Pray is my Lord ready to come forth?


No, indeed he is not.


We attend his Lordship: pray signify so much.


I need not tell him that, he knows you are too diligent.


Ha: is not that his Steward muffled so?
He goes away in a Clowd: Call him, call him.

Do you hear, sir?


By your leave, sir.


What do ye ask of me, my Friend.


We wait for certain Money here, sir.


I, if Money were as certain as your waiting,
'Twere sure enough.
Why then preferred you not your sums and Bills
When your false Masters eat of my Lords meat?
Then they could smile, and fawn upon his debts.
And take down the Intrest into their glutt'nous Mawes.
You do your selves but wrong, to stir me up,
Let me pass quietly:
Beleeue't, my Lord and I have made an end,
I have no more to reckon, he to spend.

I, but this answer will not serve.


If It 'twill not serve, it is not so base as you,
For you serve Knaves.

How? What does his casheer'd Worship mutter?


No matter what, he is poor, and that is revenge enough. Who can speak
broader, then he that has no house to put his head in? Such may rail against
great buildings


Oh here is Seruilius: now we shall know some answer.


If I might beseech you Gentlemen, to repair some other hour, I should derive
much from't. For take it of my soul, my Lord leanes wondrously to discontent:
His comfortable temper has forsook him, he is much out of health, and keeps
his Chamber


Many do keep their Chambers, are not sick:
And if it be so far beyond his health,
Me thinks he should the sooner pay his debts,
And make a clear way to the Gods.

Good Gods.


We cannot take this for answer, sir.

Seruilius help, my Lord, my Lord.


What, are my doors opposed against my passage?
Have I bin ever free, and must my house
Be my retentiue Enemy? My Jail?
The place which I have Feasted, does it now
(Like all Mankind) show me an Iron heart?

Put in now Titus.


My Lord, here is my Bill.


Here Is mine.


And mine, my Lord.


And ours, my Lord.


All our Bills.


Knock me down with 'em, cleave me to the Girdle.


Alas, my Lord.


Cut my heart in sums.


Mine, fifty Talents.


Tell out my blood.


Five thousand Crowns, my Lord.


Five thousand drops pays that.
What yours? and yours?

My Lord.


My Lord.


Tear me, take me, and the Gods fall upon you.


Faith I perceive our Masters may throw their caps at their money, these debts
may well be called desperate ones, for a madman owes 'em


They have e'ene put my breath from me the slaves. Creditors? Devils.


My dear Lord.


What if it should be so?


My Lord.


I Will have it so. My Steward?


Here my Lord.


So fitly? Go, bid all my Friends again,
Lucius, Lucullus, and Sempronius Vllorxa: All,
I Will once more feast the Rascals.

O my Lord, you only speak from your distracted soul; there is not so much
left to, furnish out a moderate Table


Be it not in thy care:
Go I charge thee, inuit them all, let in the tide
Of Knaves once more: my Cook and I Will provide.

My Lord, you have my voice, to it,
The faults Bloody:
It Is necessary he should dye:
Nothing imboldens sin so much, as Mercy.

Most true; the Law shall bruise 'em.


Honor, health, and compassion to the Senate.


Now Captain.


I am an humble Suitor to your Virtues;
For pity is the virtue of the Law,
And none but Tyrants use it cruelly.
It pleases time and Fortune to lie heavy
Upon a Friend of mine, who in hot blood
Has stepped into the Law: which is past depth
To those that (without heed) do plundge intoo't.
He is a Man (setting his Fate aside) of comely Virtues,
Nor did he soil the fact with Cowardice,
(And Honor in him, which buys out his fault)
But with a Noble Fury, and fair spirit,
Seeing his Reputation touched to death,
He did oppose his Foe:
And with such sober and unnoted passion
He did behooue his anger ere 'twas spent,
As if he had but proved an Argument.

You undergo too strict a Paradox,
Striving to make an ugly deed look fair:
Your words have took such pains, as if they labored
To bring Manslaughter into form, and set Quarrelling
Upon the head of Valor; which indeed
Is Valor mis-begot, and came into the world,
When Sects, and Factions were newly borne.
He Is truly Valiant, that can wisely suffer
The worst that man can breath,
And make his Wrongs, his Out-sider,
To wear them like his Raiment, carelessely,
And never prefer his injuries to his heart,
To bring it into danger.
If Wrongs be euilles, and enforce us kill,
What Folly it is, to hazard life for Ill.

My Lord.


You cannot make gross sins look clear,
To revenge is no Valor, but to bear.

My Lords, then under favor, pardon me,
If I speak like a Captain.
Why do fond men expose themselves to Battle,
And not endure all threats? Sleep upon it,
And let the Foes quietly cut their Throats
Without repugnancy? If there be
Such Valor in the bearing, what make we
Abroad? Why then, Women are more valiant
That stay at home, if Bearing carry it:
And the Ass, more Captain then the Lion?
The fellow laden with Irons, wiser then the Judge?
If Wisdom be in suffering, Oh my Lords,
As you are great, be pitifully Good,
Who cannot condemn rashness in cold blood?
To kill, I grant, is sins extremest Gust,
But in defense, by Mercy, it is most just.
To be in Anger, is impiety:
But who is Man, that is not Angry.
Weigh but the Crime with this.

You breath in vain.


In vain?
His service done at Lacedemon, and Bizantium,
Were a sufficient briber for his life.

What Is that?


Why say my Lords has done fair service,
And slain in fight many of your enemies:
How full of valor did he bear himself
In the last Conflict, and made plenteous wounds?

He has made too much plenty with him:
He Is a sworn Riotor, he has a sin
That often drownes him, and takes his valor prisoner.
If there were no Foes, that were enough
To overcome him. In that Beastly fury,
He has bin known to commit outrages,
And cherrish Factions. It Is inferred to us,
His days are foul, and his drink dangerous.

He dies.


Hard fate: he might have dyed in war.
My Lords, if not for any parts in him,
Though his right arm might purchase his own time,
And be in debt to none: yet more to move you,
Take my deserts to his, and join 'em both.
And for I know, your reverend Ages love Security,
I Will pawn my Victories, all my Honor to you
Upon his good returns.
If by this Crime, he owes the Law his life,
Why let the War receiue't in valiant gore,
For Law is strict, and War is nothing more.

We are for Law, he dies, urge it no more
On height of our displeasure: Friend, or Brother,
He forfeits his own blood, that spilles another.

Must it be so? It must not be:
My Lords, I do beseech you know me.

How?


Call me to your remembrances.


What.


I cannot think but your Age has forgot me,
It could not else be, I should prove so bace,
To sue and be deny'de such common Grace.
My wounds ache at you.

Do you dare our anger?
It Is in few words, but spacious in effect:
We banish thee for ever.

Banish me?
Banish your dotage, banish usury,
That makes the Senate ugly.

If after two days shine, Athens contain thee,
Attend our waightier Judgment.
And not to swell our Spirit,
He shall be executed presently.

Now the Gods keep you old enough,
That you may live
Only in bone, that none may look on you.
I Am worse then mad: I have kept back their Foes
While they have told their Money, and let out
Their Coin upon large interest. I my self,
Rich only in large hurts. All those, for this?
Is this the Balsome, that the usuring Senate
Powers into Captains wounds? Banishment.
It comes not ill: I hate not to be banished,
It is a cause worthy my Spleen and Fury,
That I may strike at Athens. I Will cheer up
My discontented Troops, and lay for hearts;
It Is Honor with most Lands to be at ods,
Soldiers should brook as little wrongs as Gods.

The good time of day to you, sir.


I also wish it to you: I think this Honorable Lord did but try us this other
day


Upon that were my thoughts tyring when we encountered. I hope it is not so low
with him as he made it seem in the trial of his several Friends


It should not be, by the persuasion of his new Feasting.


I should think so. He has sent me an earnest inuiting, which many my near
occasions did urge me to put off: but he has coniur'd me beyond them, and I
must needs appear


In like manner was I in debt to my importunat business, but he would not
hear my excuse. I am sorry, when he sent to borrow of me, that my Provision
was out


I am sick of that grief too, as I understand how all things go.


Every man hears so: what would he have borrowed of you?


A thousand Pieces.


A thousand Pieces?


What of you?


He sent to me sir -- Here he comes.


With all my heart Gentlemen both; and how fare you?


Ever at the best, hearing well of your Lordship.


The Swallow follows not Summer more willing, then we your Lordship.


Nor more willingly leaves Winter, such Summer Birds are men. Gentlemen, our
dinner will not recompense this long stay: Feast your ears with the Music
awhile: If they will fare so harshly of the Trumpets sound: we shall to it
presently


I hope it remains not unkindly with your Lordship, that I returned you an
empty Messenger


O sir, let it not trouble you.


My Noble Lord.


Ah my good Friend, what cheer?


My most Honorable Lord, I am e'ne sick of shame, that when your Lordship this
other day sent to me, I was so unfortunate a Beggar


Think not on it, sir.


If you had sent but two hours before.


Let it not cumber your better remembrance.
Come bring in all together.

All covered Dishes.


Royal Cheer, I warrant you.


Doubt not that, if money and the season can yield it


How do you? What Is the news?


Alcibiades is banished: hear you of it?


Alcibiades banished?


It Is so, be sure of it.


How? How?


I pray you upon what?


My worthy Friends, will you draw near?


I Will tell you more anon. Here Is a Noble feast toward


This is the old man still.


Wilt hold? Wilt hold?


It does: but time will, and so.


I do conceive.


Each man to his stool, with that spur as he would to the lip of his
Mistress: your diet shall be in all places alike. Make not a City Feast of it,
to let the meat cool, ere we can agree upon the first place. Sit, sit. The
Gods require our Thanks

You great Benefactors, sprinkle our Society with Thankfulness. For your own
gifts, make your selves praised: But reserve still to give, least your Deities
be despised. Lend to each man enough, that one need not lend to another. For
were your Godheads to borrow of men, men would forsake the Gods. Make the Meat
be beloved, more then the Man that gives it. Let no Assembly of Twenty, be
without a score of Villains. If there sit twelve Women at the Table, let a
dozen of them be as they are. The rest of your Fees, O Gods, the Senators of
Athens, together with the common leg of People, what is amiss in them, you
Gods, make suitable for destruction. For these my present Friends, as they are
to me nothing, so in nothing bless them, and to nothing are they welcome.
Uncover Dogs, and lap


What does his Lordship mean?


I know not.


May you a better Feast never behold
You knot of Mouth-Friends: Smoke, and lukewarm water
Is your perfection. This is Timons last,
Who stuck and spangled you with Flatteries,
Washes it off, and sprinkles in your faces
Your reeking villainy. Live loathed, and long
Most smiling, smooth, detested Parasites,
Courteous Destroyers, affable Wolves, meek Bears:
You Fools of Fortune, Trencher-friends, Times Flies,
Cap and knee-Slaues, vapors, and Minute Iackes.
Of Man and Beast, the infinite Malady
Crust you quite over. What do thou go?
Soft, take thy Physic first; thou too, and thou:
Stay I will lend thee money, borrow none.
What? All in Motion? Henceforth be no Feast,
Whereat a Villaine's not a welcome Guest.
Burn house, sink Athens, henceforth hated be
Of Timon Man, and all Humanity.

How now, my Lords?


Know you the quality of Lord Timons fury?


Push, did you see my Cap?


I have lost my Gown.


He Is but a mad Lord, and naught but humors swaies him. He gave me a Jewel the
other day, and now he has beat it out of my hat

Did you see my Jewel?


Did you see my Cap.


Here it is.


Here lies my Gown.


Let Us make no stay.


Lord Timons mad.


I feel't upon my bones.


One day he gives us Diamonds, next day stones.


Let me look back upon thee. O thou Wall
That girdles in those Wolves, diue in the earth,
And fence not Athens. Matrons, turn incontinent,
Obedience fail in Children: Slaves and Fools
Pluck the grave wrinkled Senate from the Bench,
And minister in their steeds, to general Filthes.
Convert of the Instant green Virginity,
Do It in your Parents eyes. Bankrupts, hold fast
Rather then render back; out with your Knives,
And cut your Trusters throats. Bound Servants, steal,
Large-handed Robbers your grave Masters are,
And pill by Law. Maid, to thy Masters bed,
Thy Mistress is of the Brothell. Some of sixteen,
Pluck the lyn'd Crutch from thy old limping Sire,
With it, beat out his Brains, Piety, and Fear,
Religion to the Gods, Peace, Justice, Truth,
Domesticke awe, Night-rest, and Neighborhood,
Instruction, Manners, Mysteries, and Trades,
Degrees, Obseruances, Customs, and Laws,
Decline to your confounding contraries.
And yet Confusion live: Plagues incident to men,
Your potent and infectious Feauors, heap
On Athens ripe for stroke. Thou cold Sciatica,
Cripple our Senators, that their limbs may halt
As lamely as their Manners* Lust, and Liberty
Creep in the Minds and Marrowes of our youth,
That against the stream of Virtue they may strive,
And drown themselves in Riot. Itches, Blaines,
So we all the Athenian bosoms, and their crop
Be general Leprosy: Breath, infect breath,
That their Society (as their Friendship) may
Be merely poison. Nothing I Will bear from thee
But nakedness, thou detestable Town,
Take thou that too, with multiplying Bannes:
Timon will to the Woods, where he shall find
The vnkindest Beast, more kinder then Mankind.
The Gods confound (hear me you good Gods all)
The Athenians both within and out that Wall:
And grant as Timon grows, his hate may grow
To the whole race of Mankind, high and low.
Amen.

Hear you M. Steward, where is our Master?
Are we undone, cast off, nothing remaining?

Alack my Fellows, what should I say to you?
Let me be recorded by the righteous Gods,
I am as poor as you.

Such a House broke?
So Noble a Master fallen, all gone, and not
One Friend to take his Fortune by the arm,
And go along with him.

As we do turn our backs
From our Companion, thrown into his grave,
So his Familiars to his buried Fortunes
Slinke all away leave their false vows with him
Like empty purses picked; and his poor self
A dedicated Beggar to the Air,
With his disease, of all shunned poverty,
Walks like contempt alone. More of our Fellows.

All broken Implements of a ruined house.


Yet do our hearts wear Timons Livery,
That see I by our Faces: we are Fellows still,
Serving alike in sorrow: Leak'd is our Bark,
And we poor Mates, stand on the dying Deck,
Hearing the Surges threat: we must all part
Into this Sea of Air.

Good Fellows all,
The latest of my wealth I Will share among'st you.
Where ever we shall meet, for Timons sake,
Let Us yet be Fellows. Let Us shake our heads, and say
As 'twere a Knell unto our Masters Fortunes,
We have seen better days. Let each take some:
Nay put out all your hands: Not one word more,
Thus part we rich in sorrow, parting poor.
Oh the fierce wretchedness that Glory brings us!
Who would not wish to be from wealth exempt,
Since Riches point to Misery and Contempt?
Who would be so mocked with Glory, or to live
But in a Dream of Friendship,
To have his pomp, and all what state compounds,
But only painted like his varnisht Friends:
Poor honest Lord, brought low by his own heart,
Undone by Goodness: Strange unusual blood,
When man's worst sin is, He does too much Good.
Who then dares to be half so kind again?
For Bounty that makes Gods, do still mar Men.
My dearest Lord, blessed to be most accursed,
Rich only to be wretched; thy great Fortunes
Are made thy chief Afflictions. Alas (kind Lord)
He Is flung in Rage from this ungrateful Seat
Of monstrous Friends:
Nor has he with him to supply his life,
Or that which can command it:
I Will follow and enquire him out.
I Will ever serve his mind, with my best will,
Whilst I have Gold, I Will be his Steward still.

O blessed breeding Sun, draw from the earth
Rotten humidity: below thy Sisters Orb
Infect the air. Twined Brothers of one womb,
Whose procreation, residence, and birth,
Scarce is diuidant; touch them with several fortunes,
The greater scorns the lesser. Not Nature
(To whom all sores lay siege) can bear great Fortune
But by contempt of Nature,
Raise me this Beggar, and deny't that Lord,
The Senators shall bear contempt Hereditary,
The Beggar Native Honor.
It is the Pastor Lards, the Brothers sides,
The want that makes him leave: who dares? who dares
In purity of Manhood stand upright
And say, this man's a Flatterer. If one be,
So are they all: for every grize of Fortune
Is smoothed by that below. The Learned pate
Duckes to the Golden Fool. All Is obliquie:
There Is nothing level in our cursed Natures
But direct villainy. Therefore be abhorred,
All Feasts, Societies, and Throngs of men.
His semblable, yea himself Timon disdaines,
Destruction phang mankind; Earth yield me Roots,
Who seeks for better of thee, sauce his palate
With thy most operant Poison. What is here?
Gold? Yellow, glittering, precious Gold?
No Gods, I am no idle Votarist,
Roots you clear Heavens. Thus much of this will make
Black, white; foul, fair; wrong, right;
Base, Noble; Old, young; Coward, valiant.
Ha you Gods! why this? what this, you Gods? why this
Will lugge your Priests and Servants from your sides:
Pluck stout men's pillowes from below their heads.
This yellow Slave,
Will knit and break Religions, bless the accursed,
Make the hoare Leprosy adored, place Thieves,
And give them Title, knee, and approbation
With Senators on the Bench: This is it
That makes the wappen'd Widow wed again;
She, whom the Spittle-house, and vlcerous sores,
Would cast the gorge at. This Embalmes and Spices
To' the April day again. Come damned Earth,
Thou common whore of Mankind, that puttes odds
Among the rout of Nations, I will make thee
Do thy right Nature.
Ha? A Drum? The art quick,
But yet I Will bury thee: Thou't go (strong Thief)
When Gowty keepers of thee cannot stand:
Nay stay thou out for earnest.

What art thou there? speak.


A Beast as thou art. The Canker gnaw thy heart
For showing me again the eyes of Man.

What is thy name? Is man so hateful to thee,
That art thy self a Man?

I am Misantropos, and hate Mankind,
For thy part, I do wish thou were a dog,
That I might love thee something.

I know thee well:
But in thy Fortunes am vnlearn'd, and strange.

I know thee too, and more then that I know thee
I not desire to know. Follow thy Drum,
With man's blood paint the ground Gules, Gules:
Religious Cannons, civil Laws are cruel,
Then what should war be? This fell whore of thine,
Has in her more destruction then thy Sword,
For all her Cherubin look.

Thy lips rot off.


I will not kiss thee, then the rot returns
To thine own lips again.

How came the Noble Timon to this change?


As the Moon does, by wanting light to give:
But then renew I could not like the Moon,
There were no Suns to borrow of.

Noble Timon, what friendship may I do thee?


None, but to maintain my opinion.


What is it Timon?


Promise me Friendship, but perform none. If thou will not promise, the Gods
plague thee, for thou art a man: if thou do perform, confound thee, for
thou art a man


I have heard in some sort of thy Miseries.


Thou saw them when I had prosperity.


I see them now, then was a blessed time.


As thine is now, held with a brace of Harlots.


Is this the Athenian Minion, whom the world Voic'd so regardfully?


Art thou Timandra?


Yes.


Be a whore still, they love thee not that use thee, give them diseases,
leaving with thee their Lust. Make use of thy salt hours, season the slaves
for Tubbes and Bathes, bring down Rose-checkt youth to the Pubfast, and the
Diet


Hang thee Monster.


Pardon him sweet Timandra* for his wits
Are drowned and lost in his Calamities.
I have but little Gold of late, brave Timon,
The want whereof, does daily make revolt
In my penurious Band. I have heard and grieved
How cursed Athens, mindelesse of thy worth,
Forgetting thy great deeds, when Neighbor states
But for thy Sword and Fortune trod upon them.

I prithee beat thy Drum, and get thee gone.


I am thy Friend, and pity thee dear Timon.


How do thou pity him whom you do troble,
I had rather be alone.

Why fare thee well:
Here is some Gold for thee.

Keep it, I cannot eat it.


When I have laid proud Athens on a heap.


Warr'st thou against Athens.


I Timon, and have cause.


The Gods confound them all in thy Conquest,
And thee after, when thou have Conquered.

Why me, Timon?


That by killing of Villains
Thou was it borne to conquer my Country.
Put up thy Gold. Go on, heeres Gold, go on;
Be as a Plannetary plague, when Jove
Will over some high-Vic'd City, hang his poison
In the sick air: let not thy sword skip one:
Pity not honored Age for his white Beard,
He is an Usurer. Strike me the counterfeit Matron,
It is her habit only, that is honest,
Her selfe's a Bawd. Let not the Virgins cheek
Make soft thy trenchant Sword: for those Milk pappes
That through the window Barn bore at men's eyes,
Are not within the Leaf of pity writ,
But set them down horrible Traitors. Spare not the Babe
Whose dimpled smiles from Fools exhaust their mercy;
Think it a Bastard, whom the Oracle
Has doubtfully pronounced, the throat shall cut,
And mince it sans remorse. Swear against Objects,
Put Armor on thine ears, and on thine eyes,
Whose proof, nor yels of Mothers, Maids, nor Babes,
Nor sight of Priests in holy Vestments bleeding,
Shall pierce a jot. There Is Gold to pay thy Soldiers,
Make large confusion: and thy fury spent,
Confounded be thy self. Speak not, be gone.

Have thou Gold yet, I Will take the Gold thou give me, not all thy Counsel.


Do thou or do thou not, Heavens curse upon thee.


Give us some Gold good Timon, have you more?


Enough to make a Whore forswear her Trade,
And to make Whores, a Bawd. Hold up you Sluts
Your Aprons mountant; you are not Othable,
Although I know you will swear, terribly swear
Into strong shudders, and to heavenly Agues
The immortal Gods that hear you. Spare your Oaths:
I Will trust to your Conditions, be whores still.
And he whose pious breath seeks to convert you,
Be strong in Whore, allure him, burn him up,
Let your close fire predominate his smoke,
And be no turne-coats: yet may your pains six months
Be quite contrary, And Thatch
Your poor thin Roofes with burdens of the dead,
(Some that were hanged) no matter:
Wear them, betray with them; Whore still,
Paint till a horse may mire upon your face:
A pox of wrinkles.

Well, more Gold, what then?
Beleeue't that we will do any thing for Gold.

Consumptions sow
In hollow bones of man, strike their sharp shinnes,
And mar men's spurring. Crack the Lawyers voice,
That he may never more false Title plead,
Nor sound his Quillers shrilly: Hoare the Flamen,
That scold'st against the quality of flesh,
And not believes himself. Down with the Nose,
Down with it flat, take the Bridge quite away
Of him, that his particular to foresee
Smells from the general weal. Make curld'pate Ruffians bald
And let the vnscarr'd Braggerts of the War
Derive some pain from you. Plague all,
That your Actiuity may defeat and quell
The sourse of all Erection. There Is more Gold.
Do you damn others, and let this damn you,
And ditches grave you all.

More counsel with more Money, bounteous Timon.


More whore, more Mischief first, I have given you earnest.


Strike up the Drum toward Athens, farewell Timon: if I thrive well, I Will
visit thee again


If I hope well, I Will never see thee more.


I never did thee harm.


Yes, thou spok'st well of me.


Call'st thou that harm?


Men daily find it. Get thee away,
And take thy Beagles with thee.

We but offend him, strike.


That Nature being sick of man's unkindness
Should yet be hungry: Common Mother, thou
Whose womb unmeasureable, and infinite breast
Teemes and feeds all: whose selfsame Mettle
Whereof thy proud Child (arrogant man) is puffed,
Engenders the black Toad, and Adder blew,
The gilded Newt, and eyelesse venomed Worm,
With all the abhorred Births below Crispe Heaven,
Whereon Hyperions quickening fire does shine:
Yield him, who all the humane Sons do hate,
From forth thy plenteous bosom, one poor root:
Enseare thy Fertile and Conceptious womb,
Let it no more bring out ungrateful man.
Go great with Tigers, Dragons, Wolves, and Bears,
Teeme with new Monsters, whom thy upward face
Has to the Marbled Mansion all above
Never presented. O, a Root, dear thanks:
Dry up thy Marrowes, Vines, and Plough-torne Leas,
Whereof ungrateful man with Licourish draughts
And Morsels Unctious, greases his pure mind,
That from it all Consideration slippes --
More man? Plague, plague.

I was directed hither. Men report,
Thou do affect my Manners, and do use them.

It Is then, because thou do not keep a dog
Whom I would imitate. Consumption catch thee.

This is in thee a Nature but infected,
A poor unmanly Melancholy sprung
From change of future. Why this Spade? this place?
This Slaue-like Habit, and these looks of Care?
Thy Flatterers yet wear Silk, drink Wine, lie soft,
Hug their diseased Perfumes, and have forgot
That ever Timon was. Shame not these Woods,
By pa^cing on the cunning of a Carper.
Be thou a Flatterer now, and seek to thrive
By that which has undone thee; hindge thy knee,
And let his very breath whom thou wilt observe
Blow off thy Cap: praise his most vicious strain,
And call it excellent: thou wast told thus:
Thou gave thine ears (like Tapsters, that bad welcome)
To Knaves, and all approachers: It Is most just
That thou turn Rascal, had thou wealth again,
Rascals should haue't. Do not assume my likeness.

Were I like thee, I Would throw away my self.


Thou have cast away thy self, being like thy self
A Madman so long, now a Fool: what think
That the bleake air, thy boisterous Chamberlain
Will put thy shirt on warm? Will these moist Trees,
That have out-liu'd the Eagle, page thy heels
And skip when thou point'st out? Will the cold brook
Candied with Ice, Cawdle thy Morning taste
To cure thy o're-nights surfeit? Call the Creatures,
Whose naked Natures live in all the spite
Of wrekefull Heaven, whose bare vnhoused Trunkes*
To the conflicting Elements exposed
Answer mere Nature: bid them flatter thee.
O thou shall find.

A Fool of thee: depart.


I love thee better now, then ere I did.


I hate thee worse.


Why?


Thou flatter'st misery.


I flatter not, but say thou art a Caytiffe.


Why do thou seek me out?


To vex thee.


Always a Villains Office, or a Fools.
Do please thy self in it?

I.


What, a Knave too?


If thou did put this sour cold habit on
To castigate thy pride, 'twere well: but thou
Do it enforcedly: Thou Would Courtier be again
Were thou not Beggar: willing misery
Out-liues: incertaine pomp, is crowned before:
The one is filling still, never complete:
The other, at high wish: best state Contentlesse,
Has a distracted and most wretched being,
Worse then the worst, Content.
Thou should desire to dye, being miserable.

Not by his breath, that is more miserable.
Thou art a Slave, whom Fortunes tender arm
With favor never claspt: but bred a Dog.
Had thou like us from our first swath proceeded,
The sweet degrees that this brief world affords,
To such as may the passive drugges of it
Freely command'st: thou would have plunged thy self
In general Riot, melted down thy youth
In different beds of Lust, and never learned
The Icie precepts of respect, but followed
The Sugared game before thee. But my self,
Who had the world as my Confectionarie,
The mouths, the tongues, the eyes, and hearts of men,
At duty more then I could frame employment;
That numberless upon me stuck, as leaves
Do on the Oak, have with one Winters brush
Fell from their boughs, and left me open, bare,
For every storm that blows. I to bear this,
That never knew but better, is some burden:
Thy Nature, did commence in sufferance, Time
Has made thee hard in it. Why should you hate Men?
They never flattered thee. What have thou given?
If thou will curse; thy Father (that poor ragge)
Must be thy subject; who in spite put stuff
To some shee-Begger, and compounded thee
Poor Rogue, hereditary. Hence, be gone,
If thou had not been borne the worst of men,
Thou had been a Knave and Flatterer.

Art thou proud yet?


I, that I am not thee.


I, that I was no Prodigal.


I, that I am one now.
Were all the wealth I have shut up in thee,
I Would give thee leave to hang It. Get thee gone:
That the whole life of Athens were in this,
Thus would I eat it.

Here, I will mend thy Feast.


First mend thy company, take away thy self.


So I shall mend mine own, by' the lack of thine


It Is not well mended so, it is but botcht;
If not, I would it were.

What would thou have to Athens?


Thee thither in a whirlewind: if thou will,
Tell them there I have Gold, look, so I have.

Here is no use for Gold.


The best, and truest:
For here it sleeps, and does no hired harm.

Where lie a nights Timon?


Under that is above me.
Where feed'st thou a-dayes Apemantus?

Where my stomach finds meat, or rather where I eat it.


Would poison were obedient, and knew my mind


Where would thou send it?


To sauce thy dishes.


The middle of Humanity thou never knew, but the extremity of both ends.
When thou wast in thy Gilt, and thy Perfume, they mocked thee for too much
Curiosity: in thy Rags thou know none, but art despised for the contrary.
There Is a medler for thee, eat it


On what I hate, I feed not.


Do hate a Medler?


I, though it look like thee.


And the had hated Medlers sooner, you should have loved thy self better
now. What man didd'st thou ever know unthrift, that was beloved after his
means


Who without those means thou talk of, did thou ever know beloved?


My self.


I understand thee: thou had some means to keep a Dog.


What things in the world can thou nearest compare to thy Flatterers?


Women nearest, but men: men are the things themselves. What would thou do
with the world Apemantus, if it lay in thy power


Give it the Beasts, to be rid of the men.


Would thou have thy self fall in the confusion of men, and remain a Beast
with the Beasts


I Timon.


A beastly Ambition, which the Gods grant thee to attain to. If thou were
the Lion, the Fox would beguile thee* if thou were the Lamb, the Fox would
eat thee: if thou were the Fox, the Lion would suspect thee, when peradventure
thou were accused by the Ass: If thou were the Ass, thy dullness would
torment thee; and still thou liu'dst but as a Breakefast to the Wolf. If thou
were the Wolf, thy greediness would afflict thee, and often thou should
hazard thy life for thy dinner. Were thou the Unicorn, pride and wrath would
confound thee, and make thine own self the conquest of thy fury. Were thou a
Bear, thou would be killed by the Horse: were thou a Horse, thou would
be seaz'd by the Leopard: were thou a Leopard, thou were Germane to the Lion,
and the spots of thy Kindred, were Jurors on thy life. All thy safety were
remotion, and thy defense absence. What Beast could thou be, that were not
subject to a Beast: and what a Beast art thou already, that see not thy loss
in transformation


If thou could please me
With speaking to me, thou might
Have hit upon it here.
The Commonwealth of Athens, is become
A Forest of Beasts.

How has the Ass broke the wall, that thou art out of the City.


Yonder comes a Poet and a Painter:
The plague of Company light upon thee:
I will fear to catch it, and give way.
When I know not what else to do,
I Will see thee again.

When there is nothing living but thee,
Thou shall be welcome.
I had rather be a Beggars Dog,
Then Apemantus.

Thou art the Cap
Of all the Fools alive.

Would thou were clean enough
To spit upon.

A plague on thee,
Thou art too bad to curse.

All Villains
That do stand by thee, are pure.

There is no Leprosy,
But what thou speak.

If I name thee, I Will beat thee;
But I should infect my hands.

I would my tongue
Could rot them off.

Away thou issue of a mangie dog,
Choler does kill me,
That thou art alive, I swoond to see thee.

Would thou would burst.


Away thou tedious Rogue, I am sorry I shall lose a stone by thee.


Beast.


Slave.


Toad.


Rogue, Rogue, Rogue.
I am sick of this false world, and will love naught
But even the mere necessities upon it:
Then Timon presently prepare thy grave:
Lie where the light Foam of the Sea may beat
Thy grave stone daily, make thine Epitaph,
That death in me, at others lives may laugh.
O thou sweet King-killer, and dear divorce
Twixt natural Sun and fire: thou bright defilet
of Himens purest bed, thou valiant Mars,
Thou ever, young, fresh, loved, and delicate wooer,
Whose blush does thawe the consecrated Snow
That lies on Dians lap.
Thou visible God,
That souldrest close Impossibilities,
And make them kiss; that speak with every Tongue
To every purpose: O thou touch of hearts,
Think thy slaue-man rebels, and by thy virtue
Set them into confounding odds, that Beasts
May have the world in Empire.

Would 'twere so,
But not till I am dead. I Will say the have Gold:
Thou will be thronged too shortly.

Thronged too?


I.


Thy back I prithee.


Live, and love thy misery.


Long live so, and so dye. I am quit.


Mo things like men,
Eat Timon, and abhor then.

Where should he have this Gold? It is some poor Fragment, some slender Ort of
his remainder: the mere want of Gold, and the falling from of his Friends,
drove him into this Melancholy


It is noised
He has a mass of Treasure.

Let us make the assay upon him, if he care not for it, he will supply us
easily: if he couetously reserve it, how shall's get it


True: for he bears it not about him:
It Is hid.

Is not this he?


Where?


It Is his description.


He? I know him.


Save thee Timon.


Now Thieves.


Soldiers, not Thieves.


Both too, and women's Sons.


We are not Thieves, but men
That much do want.

Your greatest want is, you want much of meat:
Why should you want? Behold, the Earth has Roots:
Within this Mile break forth a hundred Springs:
The Oaks bear Mast, the Briars Scarlet Heps,
The bounteous Huswife Nature, on each bush,
Lays her full Mess before you. Want? why Want?

We cannot live on Grass, on Berries, Water,
As Beasts, and Birds, and Fishes.

Nor on the Beasts themselves, the Birds and Fishes,
You must eat men. Yet thanks I must you con,
That you are Thieves professed: that you work not
In holier shapes: For there is boundless Theft
In limited Professions. Rascal Thieves
Here Is Gold. Go, suck the subtle blood of the Grape,
Till the high Feauor sees your blood to froth,
And so escape hanging. Trust not the Physician,
His Antidotes are poison, and he slayes
More then you Rob: Take wealth, and lives together,
Do Villain do, since you protest to do it.
Like Workmen, I Will example you with Theeuery:
The Suns a Thief, and with his great attraction
Robbes the vaste Sea. The Moons an arrant Thief,
And her pale fire, she snatches from the Sun.
The Sea^ a Thief, whose liquid Surge, resolves
The Moon into Salt tears. The Earth's a Thief,
That feeds and breeds by a composture stolen
From general excrement: each thing's a Thief.
The Laws, your curb and whip, in their rough power
Has vncheck'd Theft. Love not your selves, away,
Rob one another, there is more Gold, cut throats,
All that you meet are Thieves: to Athens go,
Break open shoppes, nothing can you steal
But Thieves do loose it: steal less, for this I give you,
And Gold confound you howsoere: Amen.

Has almost charmed me from my Profession, by persuading me to it.


It Is in the malice of mankind, that he thus aduises us not to have us thrive
in our mystery


I Will believe him as an Enemy,
And give over my Trade.

Let us first see peace in Athens, there is no time so miserable, but a man may
be true


Oh you Gods!
Is yon'd despised and ruinous man my Lord?
Full of decay and failing? Oh Monument
And wonder of good deeds, euilly bestowed!
What an alteration of Honor has desperate want made?
What vilder thing upon the earth, then Friends,
Who can bring Noblest minds, to basest ends.
How rarely does it meet with this times guise,
When man was wished to love his Enemies:
Grant I may ever love, and rather woo
Those that would mischief me, then those that do.
Has caught me in his eye, I will present my honest grief
unto him; and as my Lord, still serve him with my life.
My dearest Master.

Away: what art thou?


Have you forgot me, Sir?


Why do ask that? I have forgot all men.
Then, if thou grunt'st, the art a man.
I have forgot thee.

An honest poor servant of yours.


Then I know thee not:
I never had honest man about me, I all
I kept were Knaves, to serve in meat to Villains.

The Gods are witness,
Neu'r did poor Steward wear a truer grief
For his undone Lord, then mine eyes for you.

What, do thou weep?
Come nearer, then I love thee
Because thou art a woman, and disclaim'st
Flinty mankind: whose eyes do never give,
But through Lust and Laughter: pittie's sleeping:
Strange times yt weep with laughing, not with weeping.

I beg of you to know me, good my Lord,
TO accept my grief, and whilst this poor wealth lasts,
To entertain me as your Steward still.

Had I a Steward
So true, so just, and now so comfortable?
It almost turns my dangerous Nature wild.
Let me behold thy face: Surely, this man
Was borne of woman.
Forgive my general, and exceptlesse rashness
You perpetual sober Gods. I do proclaim
One honest man: Mistake me not, but one:
No more I pray, and he is a Steward.
How feign would I have hated all mankind,
And thou redeem'st thy self. But all save thee,
I fell with Curses.
Me thinks thou art more honest now, then wise:
For, by oppressing and betraying me,
Thou might have sooner got another Service:
For many so arrive at second Masters,
Upon their first Lords neck. But tell me true,
(For I must ever doubt, though never so sure)
Is not thy kindness subtle, covetous,
If not a Usuring kindness, and as rich men deal Gifts,
Expecting in return twenty for one?

No my most worthy Master, in whose breast
Doubt, and suspect (alas) are placed too late:
You should have feared false times, when you did Feast.
Suspect still comes, where an estate is least.
That which I show, Heaven knows, is merely Love,
Duty, and Zeal, to your unmatched mind;
Care of your Food and Living, and believe it,
My most Honored Lord,
For any benefit that points to me,
Either in hope, or present, I Would exchange
For this one wish, that you had power and wealth
To requite me, by making rich your self.

Look thee, it is so: thou singly honest man,
Here take: the Gods out of my misery
Has sent thee Treasure. Go, live rich and happy,
But thus conditioned: Thou shall build from men:
Hate all, curse all, show Charity to none,
But let the famisht flesh slide from the Bone,
Ere thou relieve the Beggar. Give to dogs
What thou denyest to men. Let Prisons swallow 'em,
Debts wither'em to nothing, be men like blasted woods
And may Diseases lick up their false bloods,
And so farewell, and thrive.

O let me stay, and comfort you, my Master.


If thou hat'st Curses
Stay not: fly, whilst thou art blessed and free:
Never see thou man, and let me never see thee.

As I took note of the place, it cannot be far where he abides.


What Is to be thought of him?
Does the Rumor hold for true,
That he is so full of Gold?

Certain.
Alcibiades reports it: Phrinica and Timandylo
Had Gold of him. He likewise enriched
Poor straggling Soldiers, with great quantity.
It Is said, he gave unto his Steward
A mighty sum.

Then this breaking of his,
Has been but a Try for his Friends?

Nothing else:
You shall see him a Palm in Athens again,
And flourish with the highest:
Therefore, it is not amiss, we tender our loves
To him, in this supposed distress of his:
It will show honestly in us,
And is very likely, to load our purposes
With what they travail for,
If it be a just and true report, that goes
Of his having.

What have you now
To present unto him?

Nothing at this time
But my Visitation: only I will promise him
An excellent Piece.

I must serve him so too;
Tell him of an intent that is coming toward him.

Good as the best.
Promising, is the very Air of the Time;
It opens the eyes of Expectation.
Performance, is ever the duller for his act,
And but in the plainer and simpler kind of people,
The deed of Saying is quite out of use.
To Promise, is most Courtly and fashionable;
Performance, is a kind of Will or Testament
Which argues a great sickness in his judgment
That makes it.

Excellent Workman,
Thou can not paint a man so badde
As is thy self.

I am thinking
What I shall say I have provided for him:
It must be a personating of himself:
A Satyr against the softness of Prosperity,
With a Discovery of the infinite Flatteries
That follow youth and opulencie.

Must thou needs
Stand for a Villain in thine own Work?
Will thou whip thine own faults in other men?
Do so, I have Gold for thee.

Nay let us seek him.
Then do we sin against our own estate,
When we may profit meet, and come too late.

True:
When the day serves before blacke-corner'd night;
Find what thou want, by free and offered light.
Come.

I Will meet you at the turn:
What a Gods Gold, that he is worshipped
In a baser Temple, then where Swine feed?
It Is thou that rigg'st the Bark, and plow'st the Foam,
Setlest admired reverence in a Slave,
To thee be worshipped, and thy Saints for aye:
Be crowned with Plagues, that thee alone obey.
Fit I meet them.

Hail worthy Timon.


Our late Noble Master.


Have I once lived
To see two honest men?

Sir:
Having often of your open Bounty tasted,
Hearing you were retired, your Friends fallen off,
Whose thankelesse Natures (O abhorred Spirits)
Not all the Whippes of Heaven, are large enough*
What, to you,
Whose Starre-like Nobleness gave life and influence
To their whole being? I am rapt, and cannot cover
The monstrous bulk of this Ingratitude
With any size of words.

Let it go,
Naked men may see it the better:
You that are honest, by being what you are,
Make them best seen, and known.

He, and my self
Have trauail'd in the great shower of your gifts,
And sweetly felt it.

I, you are honest man.


We are hither come
To offer you our service.

Most honest men:
Why how shall I requite you?
Can you eat Roots, and drink cold water, no?

What we can do,
We Will do to do you service.

Y' are honest men,
Y' have heard that I have Gold,
I am sure you have, speak truth, y' are honest men.

So it is said my Noble Lord, but therefore
Came not my Friend, nor I.

Good honest men: Thou draw'st a counterfeit
Best in all Athens, the art indeed the best,
Thou counterfet'st most lively.

So, so, my Lord.


E'ne so sir as I say. And for thy fiction,
Why thy Verse swells with stuff so fine and smooth,
That thou art even Natural in thine Art.
But for all this (my honest Natured friends)
I must needs say you have a little fault,
Marry it is not monstrous in you, neither wish I
You take much pains to mend.

Beseech your Honor
To make it known to us.

You Will take it ill.


Most thankefully, my Lord.


Will you indeed?


Doubt it not worthy Lord.


There Is never a one of you but trusts a Knave,
That mightily deceiues you.

Do we, my Lord?


I, and you hear him cogge,
See him dissemble,
Know his gross patchery, love him, feed him,
Keep in your bosom, yet remain assured
That he is a made-vp-Villaine.

I know none such, my Lord.


Nor I.


Look you,
I love you well, I Will give you Gold
Rid me these Villains from your companies;
Hang them, or stab them, drown them in a draught,
Confound them by some course, and come to me,
I Will give you Gold enough.

Name them my Lord, let us know them.


You that way, and you this:
But two in Company:
Each man a part, all single, and alone,
Yet an arch Villain keeps him company:
If where thou art, two Villains shall not be,
Come not near him. If thou would not recide
But where one Villain is, then him abandon.
Hence, pack, there is Gold, you came for Gold ye slaves:
You have work for me; there is payment, hence,
You are an Alcumist, make Gold of that:
Out Rascal dogs.

It is vain that you would speak with Timon:
For he is set so only to himself,
That nothing but himself, which looks like man,
Is friendly with him.

Bring us to his Cave.
It is our part and promise to the Athenians
To speak with Timon.

At all times alike
Men are not still the same: 'twas Time and Greefes
That framed him thus. Time with his fairer hand,
Offering the Fortunes of his former days,
The former man may make him: bring us to him
And chanced it as it may.

Here is his Cave:
Peace and content be here. Lord Timon, Timon,
Look out, and speak to Friends: The Athenians
By two of their most reverend Senate greet thee:
Speak to them Noble Timon.

Thou Sun that comforts burn,
Speak and be hanged:
For each true word, a blister, and each false
Be as a Cantherizing to the root of the Tongue,
Consuming it with speaking.

Worthy Timon.


Of none but such as you,
And you of Timon.

The Senators of Athens, greet thee Timon.


I thank them,
And would send them back the plague,
Could I but catch it for them.

O forget
What we are sorry for our selves in thee:
The Senators, with one consent of love,
Entreat thee back to Athens, who have thought
On special Dignities, which vacant lie
For thy best use and wearing.

They confess
Toward thee, forgetfulness too general gross;
Which now the public Body, which does sildome
Play the re-canter, feeling in it self
A lack of Timons aid, has since withal
Of it own fall, restraining aid to Timon,
And send forth us, to make their sorrowed render,
Together, with a recompense more fruitful
Then their offense can weigh down by the Dram,
I even such heaps and sums of Love and Wealth,
As shall to thee blot out, what wrongs were theirs,
And write in thee the figures of their love,
Eu^ to read them thine.

You witch me in it;
Surprise me to the very brinke of tears;
Lend me a Fools heart, and a woman's eyes,
And I Will be weep these comforts, worthy Senators.

Therefore so please thee to return with us,
And of our Athens, thine and ours to take
The Captainship, thou shall be met with thanks,
Allowed with absolute power, and thy good name
Live with Authority: so soon we shall drive back
Of Alcibiades the approaches wild,
Who like a Bore too savage, does root up
His Countries peace.

And shakes his threatening Sword
Against the walls of Athens.

Therefore Timon.


Well sir, I will: therefore I will sir thus:
If Alcibiades kill my Countrymen,
Let Alcibiades know this of Timon,
That Timon cares not. But if he sack fair Athens,
And take our goodly aged men by' the Beards,
Giving our holy Virgins to the stain
Of contumelious, beastly, mad-brain'd war:
Then let him know, and tell him Timon speaks it,
In pity of our aged, and our youth,
I cannot choose but tell him that I care not,
And let him take it at worst: For their Knives care not,
While you have throats to answer. For my self,
There Is not a whittle, in the unruly Camp,
But I do prize it at my love, before
The reuerends Throat in Athens. So I leave you
To the protection of the prosperous Gods,
As Thieves to Keepers.

Stay not, all is in vain.


Why I was writing of my Epitaph,
It will be seen to morrow. My long sickness
Of Health, and Living, now begins to mend,
And nothing brings me all things. Go, live still,
Be Alcibiades your plague; you his,
And last so long enough.

We speak in vain.


But yet I love my Country, and am not
One that reioyces in the common wrack,
As common brute does put it.

That Is well spoke.


Commend me to my loving Countrymen.


These words become your lips as they pass through them.


And enter in our ears, like great Triumphers
In their applauding gates.

Commend me to them,
And tell them, that to ease them of their greefes,
Their fears of Hostile strokes, their Aches losses,
Their pangs of Love, with other incident throws
That Natures fragile Vessel does sustain
In life's uncertain voyage, I will some kindness do them,
I Will teach them to prevent wild Alcibiades wrath.

I like this well, he will return again.


I have a Tree which grows here in my Close,
That mine own use inuites me to cut down,
And shortly must I fell it. Tell my Friends,
Tell Athens, in the sequence of degree,
From high to low throughout, that who so please
To stop Affliction, let him take his haste;
Come hither ere my Tree has felt the Axe,
And hang himself. I pray you do my greeting.

Trouble him no further, thus you still shall Find him.


Come not to me again, but say to Athens,
Timon has made his everlasting Mansion
Upon the Beached Verge of the salt Flood,
Who once a day with his embossed Froth*
The turbulent Surge shall cover; thither come,
And let my graue-stone be your Oracle:
Lips, let four words go by, and Language end:
What is amiss, Plague and Infection mend.
Graves only be men's works, and Death their gain;
Sun, hide thy Beams, Timon has done his Reign.

His discontents are vnremoueably coupled to Nature.


Our hope in him is dead: let us return,
And strain what other means is left unto us
In our dear peril.

It requires swift foot.


Thou have painfully discovered: are his Files
As full as thy report?

I have spoke the least.
Besides his expedition promises present approach.

We stand much hazard, if they bring not Timon.


I met a Currier, one mine ancient Friend,
Whom though in general part we were opposed,
Yet our old love made a particular force,
And made us speak like Friends. This man was riding
From Alcibiades to Timons Cave,
With Letters of entreaty, which imported
His Fellowship in the cause against your City,
In part for his sake moved.

Here come our Brothers.


No talk of Timon, nothing of him expect,
The Enemies Drum is heard, and fearful scouring
Does choke the air with dust: In, and prepare,
Ours is the fall I fear, our Foes the Snare.

By all description this should be the place.
Whose here? Speak hoa. No answer? What is this?
Tymon is dead, who has out-stretcht his span,
Some Beast read this; There does not live a Man.
Dead sure, and this his Grave, what is on this Tomb,
I cannot read: the Charracter I Will take with wax,
Our Captain has in every Figure skill;
An aged Interpreter, though young in days:
Before proud Athens he is set down by this,
Whose fall the mark of his Ambition is.

Sound to this Coward, and lascivious Town,
Our terrible approach.
Till now you have gone on, and filled the time
With all Licentious measure, making your wills
The scope of Justice. Till now, my self and such
As slept within the shadow of your power
Have wandered with our trauerst Arms, and breathed
Our sufferance vainly: Now the time is flush,
When crouching Marrow in the bearer strong
Cries (of it self) no more; Now breathless wrong,
Shall sit and pant in your great Chaires of ease,
And pursie Insolence shall break his wind
With fear and horrid flight.

Noble, and young;
When thy first greefes were but a mere conceit,
Ere thou had power, or we had cause of fear,
We sent to thee, to give thy rages Balm,
To wipe out our Ingratitude, with Loves
Above their quantity.

So did we woo
Transformed Timon, to our Cities love
By humble Message, and by promised means:
We were not all unkind, nor all deserve
The common stroke of war.

These walls of ours,
Were not erected by rheir hands, from whom
You have receyu'd your grief: Nor are they such,
That these great Towers, Trophies, and Schools should fall
For private faults in them.

Nor are they living
Who were the motives that you first went out,
(Shame that they wanted, cunning in excess)
Has broke their hearts. March, Noble Lord,
Into our City with thy Banners spread,
By decimation and a tythed death;
If thy Reuenges hunger for that Food
Which Nature loathes, take thou the destined tenth,
And by the hazard of the spotted dye,
Let dye the spotted.

All have not offended:
For those that were, it is not square to take
On those that are, Revenge: Crimes, like Lands
Are not inherited, then dear Countryman,
Bring in thy ranks, but leave without thy rage,
Spare thy Athenian Cradle, and those Kin
Which in the bluster of thy wrath must fall
With those that have offended, like a Shepherd,
Approach the Fold, and cull the infected forth,
But kill not altogether.

What thou will,
Thou rather shall enforce it with thy smile,
Then hew to it, with thy Sword.

Set but thy foot
Against our rampyr'd gates, and they shall open:
So thou will send thy gentle heart before,
To say thou't enter Friendly.

Throw thy Glove,
Or any Token of thine Honor else,
That thou will use the wars as thy redress,
And not as our Confusion: All thy Powers
Shall make their harbor in our Town, till we
Have sealed thy full desire.

Then there is my Glove,
Defend and open your vncharged Ports,
Those Enemies of Timons, and mine own
Whom you your selves shall set out for reproof,
Fall and no more; and to atone your fears
With my more Noble meaning, not a man
Shall pass his quarter, or offend the stream
Of Regular Justice in your Cities bounds,
But shall be remedied to your public Laws
At heauiest answer.

It Is most Nobly spoken.


Descend, and keep your words.


My Noble General, Timon is dead,
Entombed upon the very hemme of the Sea,
And on his Grauestone, this Insculpture which
With wax I brought away: whose soft Impression
Interprets for my poor ignorance.
Here lies a wretched Coarse, of wretched Soul bereft,
Seek not my name: A Plague consume you, wicked Caitifs left:
Here lie I Timon, who alive, all living men did hate,
Pass by, and curse thy fill, but pass and stay not here thy gate.
These well express in thee thy latter spirits:
Though thou abhorrd'st in us our humane griefs.
Scornd'st our Brains flow, and those our droplets, which
From niggard Nature fall; yet Rich Conceit
Taught thee to make vast Neptune weep for aye
On thy low Grave, on faults forgiven. Dead
Is Noble Timon, of whose Memory
Hereafter more. Bring me into your City,
And I will use the Olive, with my Sword:
Make war breed peace; make peace stint war, make each
Prescribe to other, as each others Leach.
Let our Drums strike.


