NOble Patricians, Patrons of my right,
Defend the justice of my Cause with Arms.
And Contrymen, my loving Followers,
Plead my Successiue Title with your Swords.
I was the firstborn Son, that was the last
That wore the Imperial Diadem of Rome:
Then let my Fathers Honors live in me,
Nor wrong mine Age with this indignity.

Romans, Friends, Followers,
Favorers of my Right:
If ever Bassianus, Caesar's Son,
Were gracious in the eyes of Royal Rome,
Keep then this passage to the Capitol:
And suffer not Dishonor to approach
The Imperial Seat to Virtue: consecrate
To Justice, Continence, and Nobility:
But let Desert in pure Election shine;
And Romans, fight for Freedom in your Choice.
Princes, that strive by Factions, and by Friends,
Ambitiously for Rule and Empery:
Know, that the people of Rome for whom we stand
A special Party, have by Common voice
In Election for the Roman Emperie,
Chosen Andronicus, Sur-named Pious,
For many good and great deserts to Rome.
A Nobler man, a brauer Warrior,
Lives not this day within the City Walls.
He by the Senate is accited home
From weary Wars against the barbarous Goths,
That with his Sons (a terror to our Foes)
Has yoked a Nation strong, trained up in Arms.
Ten years are spent, since first he undertook
This Cause of Rome, and chasticed with Arms
Our Enemies pride. Five times he has returned
Bleeding to Rome, bearing his Valiant Sons
In Coffins from the Field.
And now at last, laden with Honors Spoils,
Returns the good Andronicus to Rome,
Renowned Titus, flourishing in Arms.
Let us entreat, by Honor of his Name,
Whom (worthily) you would have now succeed,
And in the Capitol and Senates right,
Whom you pretend to Honor and Adore,
That you withdraw you, and abate your Strength,
Dismiss your Followers, and as Suitors should,
Plead your Deserts in Peace and Humbleness.

How fair the Tribune speaks,
To calm my thoughts.

Marcus Andronicus, so I do affie
In thy uprightness and Integrity:
And so I Love and Honor thee, and thine,
Thy Noble Brother Titus, and his Sons,
And Her (to whom my thoughts are humbled all)
Gracious Lauinia, Romes rich Ornament,
That I will here dismiss my loving Friends:
And to my Fortunes, and the Peoples Favor,
Commit my Cause in balance to be weighed.

Friends, that have been
Thus forward in my Right,
I thank you all, and here Dismiss you all,
And to the Love and Favor of my Country,
Commit my Self, my Person, and the Cause:
Rome, be as just and gracious unto me,
As I am confident and kind to thee.
Open the Gates, and let me in.

Tribunes, and me, a poor Competitor.


Romans make way: the good Andronicus,
Patron of Virtue, Romes best Champion,
Successful in the Battles that he fights,
With Honor and with Fortune is returned,
From whence he circumscribed with his Sword,
And brought to yoke the Enemies of Rome.

Hail Rome:
Victorious in thy Mourning Weeds:
Lo as the Bark that has discharged his fraught,
Returns with precious lading to the Bay,
From whence at first she weg^h'd her Anchorage:
Comes Andronicus bound with Laurel bows,
To resalute his Country with his tears,
Tears of true joy for his return to Rome,
Thou great defender of this Capitol,
Stand gracious to the Rites that we intend.
Romans, of five and twenty Valiant Sons,
Half of the number that King Priam had,
Behold the poor remains alive and dead!
These that Survive, let Rome reward with Love:
These that I bring unto their latest home,
With burial amongst their Ancestors.
Here Goths have given me leave to sheath my Sword:
Titus unkind, and careless of thine own,
Why suffer'st thou thy Sons unburied yet,
To houer on the dreadful shore of Stix?
Make way to lay them by their Brethren.
There greet in silence as the dead are wont,
And sleep in peace, slain in your Countries wars:
O sacred receptacle of my joys,
Sweet Cell of virtue and Noblitie,
How many Sons of mine have thou in store,
That thou will never render to me more?

Give us the proudest prisoner of the Goths,
That we may hew his limbs, and on a pile
Admanus fratrum, sacrifice his flesh:
Before this earthly prison of their bones,
That so the shadows be not vnappeas'd,
Nor we disturbed with prodigies on earth.

I give him you, the Noblest that Suruiues,
The eldest Son of this distressed Queen.

Stay Roman Brethren, gracious Conqueror,
Victorious Titus, rue the tears I shed,
A Mothers tears in passion for her son:
And if thy Sons were ever dear to thee,
Oh think my sons to be as dear to me.
Suffices not, that we are brought to Rome
To beautify thy Triumphs, and return
Captive to thee, and to thy Roman yoke,
But must my Sons be slaughtred in the streets,
For Valiant doings in their Countries cause?
O! If to fight for King and Commonweal,
Were piety in thine, it is in these:
Andronicus, stain not thy Tomb with blood.
Will thou draw near the nature of the Gods?
Draw near them then in being merciful.
Sweet mercy is Nobilities true badge,
Thrice Noble Titus, spare my first borne son.

Patient your self Madam, and pardon me.
These are the Brethren, whom you Goths beheld
Alive and dead, and for their Brethren slain,
Religiously they ask a sacrifice:
To this your son is marked, and die he must,
TO appease their groaning shadows that are gone.

Away with him, and make a fire straight,
And with our Swords upon a pile of wood,
Let Us hew his limbs till they be clean consumed.

O cruel irreligious piety.


Was ever Scythia half so barbarous?


Oppose me Scythia to ambitious Rome,
Alarbus goes to rest, and we survive,
To tremble under Titus threatening looks,
Then Madam stand resolved, but hope withal,
The self same Gods that armed the Queen of Troy
With opportunity of sharp revenge
Upon the Thracian Tyrant in his Tent,
May favor Tamora the Queen of Goths,
(When Goths were Goths, and Tamora was Queen)
To quit the bloody wrongs upon her foes.

See Lord and Father, how we have performed
Our Roman rightes, Alarbus limbs are lopt,
And intrals feed the sacrifising fire,
Whose smoke like in cense does perfume the sky.
Remains naught but to interre our Brethren,
And with lowed Larums welcome them to Rome.

Let it be so, and let Andronicus
Make this his latest farewell to their souls.
In peace and Honor rest you here my Sons,
Romes readiest Champions, repose you here in rest,
Secure from worldly chances and mishaps:
Here lurks no Treason, here no envy swells,
Here grow no damned grudges, here are no storms,
No noise, but silence and Eternal sleep,
In peace and Honor rest you here my Sons.

In peace and Honor, live Lord Titus long,
My Noble Lord and Father, live in Fame:
Lo at this Tomb my tributarie tears,
I render for my Bretherens Obsequies:
And at thy feet I kneel, with tears of joy
Shed on the earth for thy return to Rome.
O bless me here with thy victorious hand,
Whose Fortune Romes best Citizens applau'd.

Kind Rome,
That have thus lovingly reserved
The Cordial of mine age to glad my heart,
Lauinia live, out-liue thy Fathers days:
And Fames eternal date for virtues praise.

Long live Lord Titus, my beloved brother,
Gracious Triumpher in the eyes of Rome.

Thanks Gentle Tribune,
Noble brother Marcus.

And welcome* Nephews from succesfull wars,
You that survive and you that sleep in Fame:
Fair Lords your Fortunes are all alike in all,
That in your Countries service drew your Swords.
But safer Triumph is this Funeral Pomp,
That has aspired to Solons Happiness,
And Triumphs over chance in honors bed.
Titus Andronicus* the people of Rome,
Whose friend in justice thou have ever been,
Send thee by me their Tribune and their trust,
This Palliament of white and spotless Hue,
And name thee in Election for the Empire,
With these our late deceased Emperors Sons:
Be Candidatus then, and put it on,
And help to set a head on headless Rome.

A better head her Glorious body fits,
Then his that shakes for age and feebleness:
What should I d'on this Robe and trouble you,
Be chosen with proclamations to day,
To morrow yield up rule, resign my life,
And set abroad new business for you all*
Rome I have been thy Soldier forty years,
And led my Countries strength successefully,
And buried one and twenty Valiant Sons,
Knighted in Field, slain manfully in Arms,
In right and Service of their Noble Country:
Give me a staff of Honor for mine age,
But not a Scepter to control the world,
Upright he held it Lords, that held it last.

Titus, thou shall obtain and ask the Emperie.


Proud and ambitious Tribune can thou tell?


Patience Prince Saturninus.


Romans do me right.
Patricians draw your Swords, and sheath them not
Till Saturninus be Romes Emperor:
Andronicus would thou were shipped to hell,
Rather then rob me of the peoples hearts.

Proud Saturnine, interrupter of the good
That Noble minded Titus means to thee.

Content thee Prince, I will restore to thee
The peoples hearts, and we are them from themselves.

Andronicus, I do not flatter thee
But Honor thee, and will do till I die:
My Faction if thou strengthen with thy Friend?
I will most thankful be, and thanks to men
Of Noble minds, is Honorable Meede.

People of Rome, and Noble Tribunes here,
I ask your voices and your Suffrages,
Will you bestow them friendly on Andronicus?

To gratify the good Andronicus,
And Gratulate his safe return to Rome,
The people will accept whom he admits.

Tribunes I thank you, and this sure I make,
That you Create your Emperors eldest son,
Lord Saturnine, whose Virtues will I hope,
Reflect on Rome as Tytans Rays on earth,
And ripen Justice in this Commonweal:
Then if you will elect by my advise,
Crown him, and say: Long live our Emperor.

With Voices and applause of every sort,
Patricians and Plebeans we Create
Lord Saturninus Romes Great Emperor.
And say, Long live our Emperor Saturnine.

Titus Andronicus, for thy Favors done,
To us in our Election this day,
I give thee thanks in part of thy Deserts,
And will with Deeds requite thy gentleness:
And for an Onset Titus to advance
Thy Name, and Honorable Family,
Lauinia will I make my Empress,
Romes Royal Mistress, Mistress of my heart
And in the Sacred Pathan her espouse:
Tell me Andronicus does this motion please thee?

It does my worthy Lord, and in this match,
I hold me Highly Honored of your Grace,
And here in fight of Rome, to Saturnine,
King and Commander of our Commonweal,
The Wide-worlds Emperor, do I Consecrate,
My Sword, my Chariot, and my Prisonerss,
Presents well Worthy Romes Imperial Lord:
Receive them then, the Tribute that I owe,
Mine Honors Ensigns humbled at my feet.

Thanks Noble Titus, Father of my life,
How proud I am of thee, and of thy gifts
Rome shall record, and when I do forget
The least of these unspeakable Deserts,
Romans forget your Fealty to me.

Now Madam are your prisoner to an Emperor,
To him that for you Honor and your State,
Will use you Nobly and your followers.

A goodly Lady, trust me of the Hue
That I would choose, were I to choose a new:
Clear up Fair Queen that cloudy countenance,
Though chance of war
Has wrought this change of cheer,
Thou come not to be made a scorn in Rome:
Princely shall be thy usage every way*
Rest on my word, and let not discontent
Daunt all your hopes: Madam he comforts you,
Can make your Greater then the Queen of Goths?
Lauinia you are not displeased with this?

Not I my Lord, since true Nobili^e,
Warrants these words in Princely courtesy?

Thanks sweet Lauinia Romans let us go.
Ransomlesse here we set our Prisoners free,
Proclaim our Honors Lords with Trumpe and Drum.

Lord Titus by your leave, this Maid is mine.


How sir? Are you in earnest then my Lord?


I Noble Titus, and resolved withal,
To do my self this reason, and this right.

Suum cuiquam, is our Roman Justice,
This Prince in Justice ceazeth but his own.

And that he will and shall, if Lucius live.


Traitors auant, where is the Emperors Guarde?
Treason my Lord, Lauinia is surprised.

Surprised, by whom?


By him that justly may
Bear his Betrothed, from all the world away.

Brothers help to convey her hence away,
And with my Sword I Will keep this door safe.

Follow my Lord* and I Will soon bring her back.


My Lord you pass not here.


What villain Boy, bar'st me my way in Rome?


Help Lucius help.


My Lord you are unjust, and more then so,
In wrongful quarrel, you have slain your son.

Nor thou, nor he are any sons of mine,
My sons would never so dishonor me.
Traitor restore Lauinia to the Emperor.

Dead if you will, but not to be his wife,
That is another lawful promised Love.

No Titus* no, the Emperor needs her not,
Nor her, nor thee, nor any of thy stock:
I Will trust by Leisure him that mocks me once.
Thee never: not thy Traiterous haughty sons,
Confederates all, thus to dishonor me.
Was none in Rome to make a stale
But Saturnine? Full well Andronicus
Agree these Deeds, with that proud brag of thine,
That said, I begged the Empire at thy hands.

O monstrous, what reproachful words are these?


But go thy ways, go give that changing piece,
To him that flourisht for her with his Sword:
A Valliant son in-law thou shall enjoy:
One, sit to bandy with thy lawless Sons,
To ruffle in the Commonwealth of Rome.

These words are Razors to my wounded heart.


And therefore lovely Tamora Queen of Goths,
That like the stately Thebe mong'st her Nimphs
Do ouer-shine the Gallant'st Dames of Rome,
If thou be pleased with this my sudden choice,
Behold I choose thee Tamora for my Bride,
And will Create thee Empress of Rome.
Speak Queen of Goths do thou applau'd my choice?
And here I swear by all the Roman Gods,
Since Priest and Holy Water are so near,
And Tapers burn so bright, and every thing
In readiness for Hymeneus stand,
I will not res^lute the streets of Rome,
Or clime my Palace, till from forth this place,
I lead espoused my Bride along with me,

And here in sight of heaven to Rome I swear,
If Saturnine advance the Queen of Goths,
She will a Handmaid be to his desires,
A loving Nurse, a Mother to his youth.

Ascend Fair Qeene,
Panthean Lords, accompany
Your Noble Emperor and his lovely Bride,
Sent by the heavens for Prince Saturnine,
Whose wisdom has her Fortune Conquered,
There shall we Consummate our Spousall rites.

I am not bid to wait upon this Bride:
Titus when were thou wont to walk alone,
Dishonored thus and Challenged of wrongs?

O Titus see! O see what thou have done!
In a bad quarrel, slain a Virtuous son.

No foolish Tribune, no: No son of mine,
Nor thou, nor these Confedrates in the deed,
That has dishonored all our Family,
Unworthy brother, and unworthy Sons.

But let us give him burial as becomes:
Give Mutius burial with our Brethren.

Traitors away, he rest's not in this Tomb:
This Monument five hundredth years has stood,
Which I have Sumptuously re-edified:
Here none but Soldiers, and Romes Seruitors,
Repose in Fame: None basely slain in braules,
Bury him where you can, he comes not here.

My Lord this is impiety in you,
My Nephew Mutius deeds do plead for him,
He must be buried with his brethren.
And shall, or him we will accompany.

And shall! What villain was it spoke that word?
He that would vouched it in any place but here.

What would you bury him in my despite?


No Noble Titus, but entreat of thee,
To pardon Mutius, and to bury him.

Marcus, Even thou have stroke upon my Crest,
And with these Boye^ mine Honor thou have wounded,
My foes I do repute you every one.
So trouble me no more, but get you gone.

He is not himself, let us withdraw.


Not I tell Mutius bones be buried.


Brother, for in that name does nature plea'd.


Father, and in that name does nature speak.


Speak thou no more if all the rest will speed.


Renowned Titus more then half my soul.


Dear Father, soul and substance of us all.


Suffer thy brother Marcus to interre
His Noble Nephew here in virtues nest,
That died in Honor and Lauinia's cause.
Thou art a Roman, be not barbarous:
The Greeks upon advise did bury Ajax
That slew himself: And Laertes son,
Did graciously plead for his Funerals:
Let not young Mutius then that was thy joy,
Be barred his entrance here.

Rise Marcus, rise,
The dismall'st day is this that ere I saw,
To be dishonored by my Sons in Rome:
Well, bury him, and bury me the next.

There lie thy bones sweet Mutius with thy friends
Till we with Trophies do adorn thy Tomb.
No man shed tears for Noble Mutius,
He lives in Fame, that di'd in virtues cause.

My Lord to step out of these sudden dumps,
How comes it that the subtle Queen of Goths,
Is of a sudden thus advanced in Rome?

I know not Marcus: but I know it is,
(Whether by devise or no) the heavens can tell,
Is she not then beholding to the man,
That brought her for this high good turn so far?
Yes, and will Nobly him remunerate.

So Bassianus, you have played your prize,
God give you joy sir of your Gallant Bride.

And you of yours my Lord: I say no more,
Nor wish no less, and so I take my leave.

Traitor, if Rome have law, or we have power,
Thou and thy Faction shall repent this Rape.

Rape call you it my Lord, to cease my own,
My true betrothed Love, and now my wife?
But let the laws of Rome determine all,
Mean while I am possessed of that is mine.

It Is good sir: you are very short with us,
But if we live, we will be as sharp with you.

My Lord, what I have done as best I may,
Answer I must, and shall do with my life,
Only thus much I give your Grace to know,
By all the duties that I owe to Rome,
This Noble Gentleman Lord Titus here,
Is in opinion and in honor wronged,
That in the rescue of Lauinia,
With his own hand did slay his youngest Son,
In zeal to you, and highly moved to wrath.
To be controlled in that he frankly gave:
Receive him then to favor Saturnine,
That has expre'st himself in all his deeds,
A Father and a friend to thee, and Rome.

Prince Bassianus leave to plead my Deeds,
It Is thou, and those, that have dishonored me,
Rome and the righteous heavens be my judge,
How I have loved and Honored Saturnine.

My worthy Lord if ever Tamora,
Were gracious in those Princely eyes of thine,
Then hear me speak indifferently for all:
And at my suit (sweet) pardon what is past.

What Madam, be dishonored openly,
And basely put it up without revenge?

Not so my Lord,
The Gods of Rome for-fend,
I should be Author to dishonor you.
But on mine honor dare, I undertake
For good Lord Titus innocence in all:
Whose fury not dissembled speaks his griefs:
Then at my suit look graciously on him,
Loose not so noble a friend on vain suppose,
Nor with sour looks afflict his gentle heart.
My Lord, be ruled by me, be won at last,
Dissemble all your griefs and discontents,
You are but newly planted in your Throne,
Least then the people, and Patricians too,
Upon a just survey take Titus part,
And so supplant us for ingratitude,
Which Rome reputes to be a heinous sin.
Yield at entreats, and then let me alone:
I Will find a day to massacre them all,
And race their faction, and their family,
The cruel Father, and his trayt'rous sons,
To whom I sued for my dear sons life.
And make them know what it is to let a Queen.
Kneel in the streets, and beg for grace in vain.
Come, come, sweet Emperor, (come Andronicus)
Take up this good old man, and cheer the heart,
That dies in tempest of thy angry frown.

Rise Titus, rise,
My Empress has prevailed.

I thank your Majesty,
And her my Lord.
These words, these looks,
Infuse new life in me.

Titus, I am incorparate in Rome,
A Roman now adopted happily.
And must advise the Emperor for his good,
This day all quarrels die Andronicus.
And let it be mine honor good my Lord,
That I have reconciled your friends and you.
For you Prince Bassianus, I have past
My word and promise to the Emperor,
That you will be more mild and tractable.
And fear not Lords:
And you Lauinia,
By my advise all humbled on your knees,
You shall ask pardon of his Majesty.

We do,
And vow to heaven, and to his Highness,
That what we did, was mildly, as we might,
Tendering our sisters honor and our own.

That on mine honor here I do protest.


Away and talk not, trouble us no more.


Nay, nay,
Sweet Emperor, we must all be friends,
The Tribune and his Nephews kneel for grace,
I will not be denied, sweet heart look back.

Marcus,
For thy sake and thy brothers here,
And at my lovely Tamora's entreats,
I do remit these young men's heinous faults.
Stand up: Lauinia, though you left me like a churl,
I found a friend, and sure as death I swear,
I would not part a Batchellour from the Priest.
Come, if the Emperors Court can feast two Brides,
You are my guest Lauinia, and your friends:
This day shall be a Loue-day Tamora.

To morrow and it please your Majesty,
To hunt the Panther and the Heart with me,
With horn and Hound,
We Will give your Grace Bon iour.

Be it so Titus, and Gramercy to.


Now climbeth Tamora Olympus top,
Safe out of Fortunes shot, and sits aloft,
Secure of Thunders crack or lightning flash,
Advanced about pale enuies threatening reach:
As when the golden Sun salutes the morn,
And having gilt the Ocean with his beams,
Gallops the Zodiac in his glistering Coach,
And ouer-lookes the highest piering hills:
So Tamora.
Upon her wit does earthly honor wait,
And virtue stoopes and trembles at her frown.
Then Aaron arm thy heart, and fit thy thoughts,
To mount aloft with thy Imperial Mistress,
And mount her pitch, whom thou in ttiumph long
Have prisoner held, fettred in amorous chains,
And faster bound to Aarons charming eyes,
Then is Prometheus ti'de to Caucasus.
Away with slavish weeds, and idle thoughts,
I will be bright and shine in Pearl and Gold,
To wait upon this new made Empress.
To wait said I? To wanton with this Queen,
This Goddess, this Semorimis, this Queen,
This Siren, that will charm Romes Saturnine,
And see his shipwreck, and his Commonweals.
Hollo, what storm is this?

Chiron thy years wants wit, thy wit wants edge
And manners to intru'd where I am graced,
And may for ought thou know affected be.

Demetrius, thou doo'st ouer-weene in all,
And so in this, to bear me down with braues,
It Is not the difference of a year or two
Makes me less gracious, or thee more fortunate:
I am as able, and as fit, as thou,
To serve, and to deserve my Mistress grace,
And that my sword upon thee shall approve,
And plead my passions for Lauinia's love.

Clubs, clubs, these lovers will not keep the peace.


Why Boy, although our mother (unadvised)
Gave you a daunsing Rapier by your side,
Are you so desperate grown to threat your friends?
Go too: have your Lath glued within your sheath,
Till you know better how to handle it.

Mean while sir, with the little skill I have,
Full well shall thou perceive how much I dare.

I Boy, grow ye so brave?


Why how now Lords?
So nere the Emperors Palace dare you draw,
And maintain such a quarrel openly?
Full well I wot, the ground of all this grudge.
I would not for a million of Gold,
The cause were known to them it most concerns.
Nor would your noble mother for much more
Be so dishonored in the Court of Rome:
For shame put up.

Not I, till I have sheathed
My rapier in his bosom, and withal
Thrust these reproachful speeches down his throat,
That he has breathed in my dishonor here.

For that I am prepared, and full resolved,
Foul spoken Coward,
That thundrest with thy tongue,
And with thy weapon nothing dare perform.

A way I say.
Now by the Gods that warlike Goths adore,
This pretty brabble will undo us all:
Why Lords, and think you not how dangerous
It is to set upon a Princes right?
What is Lauinia then become so loose,
Or Bassianus so degenerate,
That for her love such quarrels may be broacht,
Without controulement, Justice, or revenge?
Young Lords beware, and should the Empress know,
This discord ground, the music would not please.

I care not I, knew she and all the world,
I love Lauinia more then all the world.

Youngling,
Learn thou to make some meaner choice,
Lauinia is thine elder brothers hope.

Why are ye mad? Or know ye not in Rome,
How furious and impatient they be,
And cannot brook Competitors in love?
I tell you Lords, you do but plot your deaths,
By this devise.

Aaron, a thousand deaths would I propose,
To atchieue her whom I do love.

To atcheive her, how?


Why, make thou it so strange?
She is a woman, therefore may be wooed,
She is a woman, therefore may be won,
She is Lauinia therefore must be loved.
What man, more water glideth by the Mill
Then wots the Miller of, and easy it is
Of a cut loaf to steal a shiue we know:
Though Bassianus be the Emperors brother,
Better then he have worn Vulcans badge.

I, and as good as Saturnius may.


Then why should he despair that knows to court it
With words, fair looks, and liberality:
What have not thou full often struck a Do,
And borne her cleanly by the Keepers nose?

Why then it seems some certain snatch or so
Would serve your turns.

I so the turn were served.


Aaron thou have hit it.


Would you had hit it too,
Then should not we be tired with this adoo:
Why hark ye, hark ye, and are you such fools,
To square for this? Would it offend you then?

Faith not me.


Not me, so I were one.


For shame be friends, and join for that you iar:
It Is policy, and stratageme must do
That you affect, and so must you resolve,
That what you cannot as you would atcheiue,
You must perforce accomplish as you may:
Take this of me, Lucrece was not more chaste
Then this Lauinia, Bassianus love,
A speedier course this lingering languishment
Must we pursue, and I have found the path:
My Lords, a solemn hunting is in hand.
There will the lovely Roman Ladies troop:
The Forest walks are wide and spacious,
And many unfrequented plots there are,
Fitted by kind for rape and villain:
Single you thither then this dainty Do,
And strike her home by force, if not by words:
This way or not at all, stand you in hope.
Come, come, our Empress with her sacred wit
To villainie and vengance consecrate,
Will we acquaint with all that we intend,
And she shall file our engines with advise,
That will not suffer you to square your selves,
But to your wishes height advance you both.
The Emperors Court is like the house of Fame,
The palace full of tongues, of eyes, of ears:
The Woods are ruthlesse, dreadful, deaf, and dull:
There speak, and strike brave Boys, and take your turns.
There serve your lusts, shadowed from heavens eye,
And revel in Lauinia's Treasury.

Thy counsel Lad smells of no cowardice.


Sij fas aut nefas, till I find the streams,
To cool this heat, a Charm to calm their fits,
Per Stigia per manes Vehor.

The hunt is up, the morn is bright and gray,
The fields are fragrant, and the Woods are green,
Uncouple here, and let us make a bay,
And wake the Emperor, and his lovely Bride,
And rouse the Prince, and ring a hunters peale,
That all the Court may echo with the noise.
Sons let it be your charge, as it is ours,
To attend the Emperors person carefully:
I have been troubled in my sleep this night,
But dawning day new comfort has inspired.

Many good morrowes to your Majesty,
Madam to you as many and as good.
I promised your Grace, a Hunters peale.

And you have rung it lustily my Lords,
Somewhat to early for new married Ladies.

Lauinia, how say you?


I say no:
I have been awake two hours and more.

Come on then, horse and Chariots let us have,
And to our sport: Madam, now shall ye see,
Our Roman hunting.

I have dogs my Lord,
Will rouse the proudest Panther in the Chase,
And clime the highest Pomontary top.

And I have horse will follow where the game
Makes way, and runs likes Swallows ore the plain

Chiron we hunt not we, with Horse nor Hound
But hope to pluck a dainty Do to ground.

He that had wit, would think that I had none,
To bury so much Gold under a Tree,
And never after to inherit it.
Let him that thinks of me so abiectly,
Know that this Gold must coin a stratageme,
Which cunningly effected, will beget
A very excellent piece of villainy:
And so repose sweet Gold for their unrest,
That have their Alms out of the Empress Chest.

My lovely Aaron,
Wherefore look thou sad,
When every thing does make a Gleefull boast?
The Birds chaunt melody on every bush,
The Snake lies rolled in the cheerful Sun,
The green leaves quiver* with the cooling wind,
And make a cheker'd shadow on the ground:
Under their sweet shade, Aaron let us sit,
And whilst the babbling Echo mock's the Hounds,
Replying shrilly to the well tun'd-Hornes,
As if a double hunt were heard at once,
Let us sit down, and mark their yelping noise:
And after conflict, such as was supposed.
The wandering Prince and Dido once enjoyed,
When with a happy storm they were surprised,
And Curtain'd with a Counsaile-keeping Cave,
We may each wreathed in the others arms,
(Our pastimes done) possess a Golden slumber,
Whiles Hounds and Horns, and sweet Melodious Birds
Be unto us, as is a Nurses Song
Of Lullabie, to bring her Babe asleep.

Madame,
Though Venus govern your desires,
Saturn is Dominator over mine:
What signifies my deadly standing eye,
My silence, and my Cloudy Melancholy,
My fleece of Woolly hair, that now vncurles,
Even as an Adder when she does vnrowle
To do some fatal execution?
No Madam, these are no Veneriall signs,
Vengeance is in my heart, death in my hand,
Blood, and revenge, are Hammering in my head.
Hark Tamora, the Empress of my Soul,
Which never hopes more heaven, then rests in thee,
This is the day of Doom for Bassianus;
His Philomel must loose her tongue to day,
Thy Sons make Pillage of her Chastity,
And wash their hands in Bassianus blood.
See thou this Letter, take it up I pray thee,
And give the King this fatal plotted Scrowle,
Now question me no more, we are espied,
Here comes a parcel of our hopeful Booty,
Which dreads not yet their lives destruction.

Ah my sweet Moore:
Sweeter to me then life.

No more great Empress, Bassianus comes,
Be cross with him, and I Will go fetch thy Sons
To back thy quarrel what so ere they be.

Whom have we here?
Romes Royal Empress,
Unfurnished of our well beseeming troop?
Or is it Dian habited like her,
Who has abandoned her holy Groves,
To see the general Hunting in this Forest?

Saucy controuler of our private steps:
Had I the power, that some say Dian had,
Thy Temples should be planted presently.
With Horns, as was Acteons, and the Hounds
Should drive upon his new transformed limbs,
Unmannerly Intruder as thou art.

Under your patience gentle Empress,
It Is thought you have a goodly gift in Horning,
And to be doubted, that your Moore and you
Are singled forth to try experiments:
Jove shield your husband from his Hounds to day,
It Is pity they should take him for a Stag.

Believe me Queen, your swarth Cymerion,
Does make your Honor of his bodies Hue,
Spotted, detested, and abominable.
Why are you sequestered from all your train?
Dismounted from your Snow-white goodly Steed,
And wandered hither to an obscure plot,
Accompanied with a barbarous Moore,
If foul desire had not conducted you?

And being intercepted in your sport,
Great reason that my Noble Lord, be rated
For Sauciness, I pray you let us hence,
And let her joy her Raven colored love,
This valley fits the purpose passing well.

The King my Brother shall have notice of this.


I, for these sli^s have made him noted long,
Good King, to be so mightily abused.

Why I have patience to endure all this?


How now dear Sovereign
And our gracious Mother,
Why does your Highness look so pale and wan?

Have I not reason think you to look pale.
These two have tic'd me hither to this place,
A barren, detested vale you see it is.
The Trees though Summer, yet forlorn and lean,
Ore-come with Moss, and balefull Misselto.
Here never shines the Sun, here nothing breeds,
Unless the nightly Owl, or fatal Raven:
And when they showed me this abhorred pit,
They told me here at dead time of the night,
A thousand Fiends, a thousand hissing Snakes,
Ten thousand swelling Toades, as many Vrchins,
Would make such fearful and confused cries,
As any mortal body hearing it,
Should strait fall mad, or else die suddenly.
No sooner had they told this hellish tale,
But strait they told me they would bind me here,
Unto the body of a dismal yew,
And leave me to this miserable death.
And then they called me foul Adulteress,
Lascivious Goth, and all the bitterest tea^n^es
That ever ear did hear to such effect.
And had you not by wondrous fortune come,
This vengeance on me had they executed:
Revenge it, as you love your Mothers life,
Or be ye not henceforth called my Children,

This is a witness that I am thy Son.


And this for me,
Struck home to show my strength.

I come Semeramis nay Barbarous Tamora.
For no name fits thy nature but thy own.

Give me thy poyniard, you shall know my boys
Your Mothers hand shall right your Mothers wrong.

Stay Madam here is more belongs to her,
First thrash the Corn, then after burn the straw:
This Minion stood upon her chastity,
Upon her Nuptial vow, her loyalty.
And with that painted hope, braues your Mightiness,
And shall she carry this unto her grave?

And if she do,
I would I were an Eunuch,
Drag hence her husband to some secret hole,
And make his dead Trunke-Pillow to our lust.

But when ye have the honey we desire,
Let not this Waspe out-liue us both to sting.

I warrant you Madam we will make that sure:
Come Mistress, now perforce we will enjoy,
That nice-preserued honesty of yours.

Oh Tamora, thou bear a woman face.


I will not hear her speak, away with her.


Sweet Lords entreat her hear me but a word.


Listen fair Madam, let it be your glory
To see her tears but be your heart to them,
As unrelenting flint to drops of rain.

When did the Tigers young-ones teach the dam?
O do not learn her wrath, she taught it thee,
The milk thou suck'st from her did turn to Marble,
Even at thy Teat thou had thy Tyranny,
Yet every Mother breeds not Sons alike,
Do thou entreat her show a woman pity.

What,
Would thou have me prove my self a bastard?

It Is true,
The Raven does not hatch a Lark,
Yet have I heard, Oh could I find it now,
The Lion moved with pity, did endure
To have his Princely paws pared all away.
Some say, that Ravens foster forlorn children,
The whilst their own birds famish in their nests:
Oh be to me though thy hard heart say no,
Nothing so kind but something pitiful.

I know not what it means, away with her.


Oh let me teach thee for my Fathers sake,
That gave thee life when well he might have slain thee:
Be not obdurate, open thy deaf ears.

Had thou in person nere offended me.
Even for his sake am I pitiless:
Remember Boys I powered forth tears in vain,
To save your brother from the sacrifice,
But fierce Andronicus would not relent,
Therefore away with her, and use her as you will,
The worse to her, the better loved of me.

Oh Tamora,
Be called a gentle Queen,
And with thine own hands kill me in this place,
For it is not life that I have begged so long,
Poor I was slain, when Bassianus died.

What beg'st thou then? fond woman let me go?


It Is present death I beg, and one thing more,
That womanhood denies my tongue to tell:
Oh keep me from their worse then killing lust,
And tumble me into some loathsome pit,
Where never man's eye may behold my body,
Do this, and be a charitable murderer.

So should I rob my sweet Sons of their fee,
No let them satisfy their lust on thee.

Away,
For thou have staid us here too long.

No Garace,
No womanhood? Ah beastly creature,
The blot and enemy to our general name,
Confusion fall --

Nay then I Will stop your mouth
Bring thou her husband,
This is the Hole where Aaron bid us hide him.

Farewell my Sons, see that you make her sure,
Nere let my heart know merry cheer indeed,
Till all the Andronici be made away:
Now will I hence to seek my lovely Moore,
And let my spleenefull Sons this Trull defloure.

Come on my Lords, the better foot before,
Straight will I bring you to the loathsome pit,
Where I espied the Panther fast asleep.

My sight is very dull what ere it bodes.


And mine I promise you, were it not for shame,
Well could I leave our sport to sleep a while.

What art thou fallen?
What subtle Hole is this,
Whose mouth is covered with Rude growing Briers,
Upon whose leaves are drops of new-shed-blood,
As fresh as mornings dew distilled on flowers,
A very fatal place it seems to me:
Speak Brother have thou hurt thee with the fall?

Oh Brother,
With the dismal'st object
That ever eye with sight made heart lament.

Now will I fetch the King to find them here,
That he thereby may have a likely guess,
How these were they that made away his Brother.

Why do not comfort me and help me out,
From this vnhallow'd and blood-stained Hole?

I am surprised with an uncouth fear,
A chilling sweat ore-runs my trembling joints,
My heart suspects more then mine eye can see.

To prove thou have a true divining heart,
Aaron and thou look down into this den,
And see a fearful sight of blood and death.

Aaron is gone,
And my compassionate heart
Will not permit mine eyes once to behold
The thing whereat it trembles by surmise:
Oh tell me how it is, for nere till now
Was I a child, to fear I know not what.

Lord Bassianus lies embrewed here,
All on a heap like to the slaughtred Lamb,
In this detested, dark, blood-drinking pit.

If it be dark, how do thou know it is he?


Upon his bloody finger he does wear
A precious Ring, that lightens all the Hole:
Which like a Taper in some Monument,
Does shine upon the dead man's earthly cheeks,
And shows the ragged intrailes of the pit:
So pale did shine the Moon on Piramus,
When he by night lay bathed in Maiden blood:
O Brother help me with thy fainting hand.
If fear has made thee faint, as me it has,
Out of this fell devouring receptacle,
As hateful as Ocitus mistie mouth.

Reach me thy hand, that I may help thee out,
Or wanting strength to do thee so much good,
I may be plucked into the swallowing womb,
Of this deep pit, poor Bassianus grave:
I have no strength to pluck thee to the brinke.

Nor I no strength to clime without thy help.


Thy hand once more, I will not loose again,
Till thou art here aloft, or I below,
Thou can not come to me, I come to thee.

Along with me, I Will see what hole is here,
And what he is that now is leapt into it.
Say, who art thou that lately did it descend,
Into this gaping hollow of the earth?

The unhappy son of old Andronicus,
Brought hither in a most unlucky hour,
To find thy brother Bassianus dead.

My brother dead? I know thou do but jest,
He and his Lady both are at the Lodge,
Upon the North-side of this pleasant Chase,
It Is not an hour since I left him there.

We know not where you left him all alive,
But out alas, here have we found him dead.

Where is my Lord the King?


Here Tamora, though grieved with killing grief.


Where is thy brother Bassianus?


Now to the bottom do thou search my wound,
Poor Bassianus here lies murdered.

Then all too late I bring this fatal writ,
The complot of this timelesse Tragedy,
And wonder greatly that man's face can fold,
In pleasing smiles such murderous Tyranny.

And if we miss to meet him hansomely,
Sweet huntsman, Bassianus it is we mean,
Do thou so much as dig the grave for him,
Thou know our meaning, look for thy reward
Among the Nettles at the Elder tree:
Which ouer-shades the mouth of that same pit:
Where we decreed to bury Bassianuss
Do this and purchase us thy lasting friends.

Oh Tamora, was ever heard the like?
This is the pit, and this the Elder tree,
Look sirs, if you can find the huntsman out,
That should have murdered Bassianus here.

My gracious Lord here is the bag of Gold.


Two of thy whelps, fell Curs of bloody kind
Have here bereft my brother of his life:
Sirs drag them from the pit unto the prison,
There let them bide until we have devised
Some never heard-of tortering pain for them.

What are they in this pit,
Oh wondrous thing!
How easily murder is discovered?

High Emperor, upon my feeble knee,
I beg this boon, with tears, not lightly shed,
That this fell fault of my accursed Sons,
Accursed, if the faults be proved in them.

If it be proved? you see it is apparent,
Who found this Letter, Tamora was it you?

Andronicus himself did take it up.


I did my Lord,
Yet let me be their bail,
For by my Fathers reverent Tomb I vow
They shall be ready at your Highness will,
To answer their suspicion with their lives.

Thou shall not bail them, see thou follow me:
Some bring the murdered body, some the murderers,
Let them not speak a word, the guilt is plain,
For by my soul, were there worse end then death,
That end upon them should be executed.

Andronicus I will entreat the King,
Fear not thy Sons, they shall do well enough.

Come Lucius come,
Stay not to talk with them.

So now go tell and if thy tongue can speak,
Who to was that cut thy tongue and ravished thee.

Write down thy mind, bewray thy meaning so,
And if thy stumpes will let thee play the Scribe.

See how with signs and tokens she can scowle.


Go home,
Call for sweet water, wash thy hands.

She has no tongue to call, nor hands to wash.
And so let us leave her to her silent walks.

And to were my cause, I should go hang my self.


If thou had hands to help thee knit the cord.
Who is this, my Niece that flies away so fast?
Cosen a word, where is your husband?
If I do dream, would all my wealth would wake me;
If I do wake, some Planet strike me down,
That I may slumber in eternal sleep.
Speak gentle Niece, what stern ungentle hands
Has lopt, and hewed, and made thy body bare
Of her two branches, those sweet Ornaments
Whose circkling shadows, Kings have sought to sleep in
And might not gain so great a happiness
As half thy Love: Why do not speak to me?
Alas, a Crimson river of warm blood,
Like to a bubling fountain stirred with wind,
Does rise and fall between thy Rosed lips,
Coming and going with thy honey breath.
But sure some Tereus has defloured thee,
And least thou should detect them, cut thy tongue.
Ah, now thou turn'st away thy face for shame:
And notwithstanding all this loss of blood,
As from a Conduit with their issuing Spouts,
Yet do thy cheeks look red as Titans face,
Blushing to be encountered with a Cloud,
Shall I speak for thee? shall I say it is so?
Oh that I knew thy heart, and knew the beast
That I might rail at him to ease my mind.
Sorrow concealed, like an Oven stopped,
Does burn the heart to Cinders where it is.
Fair Philomela she but lost her tongue,
And in a tedious Sampler sowed her mind.
But lovely Niece, that mean is cut from thee,
A craftier Tereus have thou met withal,
And he has cut those pretty fingers off,
That could have better sowed then Philomel.
Oh had the monster seen those Lilly hands,
Tremble like Aspen leaves upon a Lute,
And make the silken strings delight to kiss them,
He would not then have touched them for his life.
Or had he heard the heavenly Harmony,
Which that sweet tongue has made:
He would have dropped his knife and fell asleep,
As Cerberus at the Thracian Poets feet.
Come, let us go, and make thy father blind,
For such a sight will blind a fathers eye.
One hours storm will drown the fragrant meades,
What, will whole months of tears thy Fathers eyes?
Do not draw back, for we will mourn with thee:
Oh could our mourning ease thy misery.

Hear me grave fathers, noble Tribunes stay,
For pity of mine age, whose youth was spent
In dangerous wars, whilst you securely slept:
For all my blood in Romes great quarrel shed,
For all the frosty nights that I have watched,
And for these bitter tears, which now you see,
Filling the aged wrinkles in my cheeks,
Be pitiful to my condemned Sons,
Whose souls is not corrupted as it is thought:
For two and twenty sons I never wept,
Because they died in honors lofty bed.
For these, Tribunes, in the dust I write
My hearts deep languor, and my souls sad tears:
Let my tears stanch the earths dry appetite.
My sons sweet blood, will make it shame and blush:
O earth! I will be friend thee more with rain
That shall distill from these two ancient ruins,
Then youthful April shall with all his showers
In summers drought: I Will drop upon thee still,
In Winter with warm tears I Will melt the snow,
And keep erernall spring time on thy face,
So thou refuse to drink my dear sons blood.
Oh reverent Tribunes, oh gentle aged men,
Unbind my sons, reuerse the doom of death,
And let me say (that never wept before)
My tears are now preualing Orators.

Oh noble father, you lament in vain,
The Tribunes hear not, no man is by,
And you recount your sorrows to a stone.

Ah Lucius for thy brothers let me plead,
Grave Tribunes, once more I entreat of you.

My gracious Lord, no Tribune hears you speak.


Why it is no matter man, if they did hear
They would not mark me: oh if they did hear
They would not pity me.
Therefore I tell my sorrows bootles to the stones.
Who though they cannot answer my distress,
Yet in some sort they are better then the Tribunes,
For that they will not intercept my tale;
When I do weep, they humbly at my feet
Receive my tears, and seem to weep with me,
And were they but attired in grave weeds,
Rome could afford no Tribune like to these.
A stone is as soft wax,
Tribunes more hard then stones:
A stone is silent, and offends not,
And Tribunes with their tongues doom men to death.
But wherefore stand'st thou with thy weapon drawn?

To rescue my two brothers from their death,
For which attempt the Judges have pronounc'st
My everlasting doom of banishment.

O happy man, they have befriended thee:
Why foolish Lucius, do thou not perceive
That Rome is but a wilderness of Tigers?
Tigers must pray, and Rome affords no prey
But me and and mine: how happy art thou then,
From these deuourers to be banished?
But who comes with our brother Marcus here?

Titus, prepare thy noble eyes to weep,
Or if not so, thy noble heart to break:
I bring consuming sorrow to thine age.

Will it consume me? Let me see it then.


This was thy daughter.


Why Marcus so she is.


Aye me this object kills me.


Faint-harted boy, arise and look upon her,
Speak Lauinia, what accursed hand
Has made thee handlesse in thy Fathers sight?
What fool has added water to the Sea?
Or brought a faggot to bright burning Troy?
My grief was at the height before thou came,
And now like Nylus it disdaineth bounds:
Give me a sword, I Will chop off my hands too,
For they have fought for Rome, and all in vain:
And they have nur'st this woe,
In feeding life:
In bootelesse prayer have they been held up,
And they have served me to effectlesse use.
Now all the service I require of them,
Is that the one will help to cut the other:
It Is well Lauinia, that thou have no hands,
For hands to do Rome service, is but vain.

Speak gentle sister, who has martyred thee?


O that delightful engine of her thoughts,
That blab'd them with such pleasing eloquence,
Is torn from forth that pretty hollow cage,
Where like a sweet mellodius bird it sung,
Sweet varied notes enchanting every ear.

Oh say thou for her,
Who has done this deed?

Oh thus I found her straying in the Park,
Seeking to hide herself as does the Dear
That has receiude some vnrecuring wound.

It was my Dear,
And he that wounded her,
Has hurt me more, then had he killed me dead:
For now I stand as one upon a Rock,
Inuiron'd with a wilderness of Sea.
Who marks the waxing tide,
Grow wave by wave,
Expecting ever when some envious surge,
Will in his brinish bowels swallow him.
This way to death my wretched sons are gone:
Here stands my other son, a banished man,
And here my brother weeping at my woes.
But that which gives my soul the greatest spurn,
Is dear Lauinia, deerer then my soul.
Had I but seen thy picture in this plight,
It would have madded me. What shall I do?
Now I behold thy lively body so?
Thou have no hands to wipe away thy tears,
Nor tongue to tell me who has martyred thee:
Thy husband he is dead, and for his death
Thy brothers are condemned, and dead by this.
Look Marcus, ah son Lucius look on her:
When I did name her brothers, then fresh tears
Stood on her cheeks, as does the honey dew,
Upon a gathred Lilly almost withered.,

Perchance she weeps because they killed her husband,
Perchance because she knows him innocent.

If they did kill thy husband then be joyful,
Because the law has taken revenge on them.
No, no, they would not do so foul a deed,
Witness the sorrow that their sister makes.
Gentle Lauinia let me kiss thy lips,
Or make some signs how I may do thee ease:
Shall thy good Uncle, and thy brother Lucius,
And thou and I sit round about some Fountain,
Looking all downwards to behold our cheeks
How they are stained in meadows, yet not dry
With miery slime left on them by a flood:
And in the Fountain shall we gaze so long,
Till the fresh taste be taken from that cleerenes,
And made a brine pit with our bitter tears?
Or shall we cut away our hands like thine?
Or shall we bite our tongues, and in dumb shows
Pass the remainder of our hateful days?
What shall we do? Let us that have our tongues
Plot some devise of further miseries
To make us wondered at in time to come.

Sweet Father cease your tears, for at your grief
See how my wretched sister sobs and weeps.

Patience dear Niece, good Titus dry thine eyes.


Ah Marcus, Marcus, Brother well I wot,
Thy napkin cannot drink a tear of mine,
For thou poor man have drowned it with thine own.

Ah my Lauinia I will wipe thy cheeks.


Mark Marcus mark, I understand her signs,
Had she a tongue to speak, now would she say
That to her brother which I said to thee.
His Napkin with her true tears all be wet,
Can do no service on her sorrowful cheeks.
Oh what a simpathy of woe is this!
As far from help as Limbo is from bliss,

Titus Andronicus, my Lord the Emperor,
Sends thee this word, that if thou love thy sons,
Let Marcus, Lucius, or thy self old Titus,
Or any one of you, chop off your hand,
And send it to the King: he for the same,
Will send thee hither both thy sons alive,
And that shall be the ransom for their fault.

Oh gracious Emperor, oh gentle Aaron.
Did ever Raven sing so like a Lark,
That gives sweet tidings of the Suns vprise?
With all my heart, I Will send the Emperor my hand,
Good Aron will thou help to chop it off?

Stay Father, for that noble hand of thine,
That has thrown down so many enemies,
Shall not be sent: my hand will serve the turn,
My youth can better spare my blood then you,
And therefore mine shall save my brothers lives.

Which of your hands has not defended Rome,
And reared aloft the bloody Battleaxe.
Writing destruction on the enemies Castle?
Oh none of both but are of high desert:
My hand has bin but idle, let it serve
To ransom my two nephews from their death,
Then have I kept it to a worthy end.

Nay come agree, whose hand shall go along
For fear they die before their pardon come.

My hand shall go.


By heaven it shall not go.


Sirs strive no more, such withered herbs as these
Are meet for plucking up, and therefore mine.

Sweet Father, if I shall be thought thy son,
Let me redeem my brothers both from death.

And for our fathers sake, and mothers care,
Now let me show a brothers love to thee.

Agree between you, I will spare my hand.


Then I Will go fetch an Axe.


But I will use the Axe.


Come hither Aaron, I Will deceive them both,
Lend me thy hand, and I will give thee mine,

If that be called deceit, I will be honest,
And never whilst I live deceive men so:
But I Will deceive you in another sort,
And that you will say ere half an hour pass.

Now stay you strife, what shall be, is dispatched:
Good Aron give his Majesty me hand,
Tell him, it was a hand that warded him
From thousand dangers: bid him bury it:
More has it merited: That let it have.
As for for my sons, say I account of them,
As jewels purchased at an easy price,
And yet dear too, because I bought mine own.

I go Andronicus, and for thy hand,
Look by and by to have thy sons with thee:
Their heads I mean: Oh how this villainy
Does fat me with the very thoughts of it.
Let fools do good, and fair men call for grace,
Aron will have his soul black like his face.

O here I lift this one hand up to heaven,
And bow this feeble ruin to the earth,
If any power pitties wretched tears,
To that I call: what will thou kneel with me?
Do then dear heart, for heaven shall hear our prayers,
Or with our sighs we will breath the welkin dim,
And stain the Sun with fogge as sometime clouds,
When they do hug him in their melting bosoms.

Oh brother speak with possibilities,
And do not break into these deep extremes.

Is not my sorrow deep, having no bottom?
Then be my passions bottomless with them.

But yet let reason govern thy lament.


If there were reason for these miseries,
Then into limits could I bind my woes:
When heaven does weep, does not the earth ore flow?
If the winds rage, does not the Sea wax mad,
Threatening the welkin with his big-swolne face?
And will thou have a reason for this coile?
I am the Sea. Hark how her sighs do flow:
She is the weeping welkin, I the earth:
Then must my Sea be moved with her sighs,
Then must my earth with her continual tears,
Become a deluge: ouerflow'd and drowned:
For why, my bowels cannot hide her woes,
But like a drunkard must I vomit them:
Then give me leave, for loosers will have leave,
To ease their stomachs with their bitter tongues,

Worthy Andronicus, ill art thou repaid,
For that good hand thou sentst the Emperor:
Here are the heads of thy two noble sons.
And heeres thy hand in scorn to thee sent back:
Thy griefs, their sports: Thy resolution mocked,
That woe is me to think upon thy woes,
More then remembrance of my fathers death.

Now let hot Aetna cool in Cicilie,
And be my heart an euer-burning hell:
These miseries are more then may be borne.
To weep with them that weep, does ease some deal,
But sorrow flouted at, is double death.

Ah that this sight should make so deep a wound,
And yet detested life not shrink thereat:
That ever death should let life bear his name,
Where life has no more interest but to breath.

Alas poor heart that kiss is comfortless,
As frozen water to a starued snake.

When will this fearful slumber have an end?


Now farewell flattery, die Andronicus,
Thou do not slumber, see thy two sons heads,
Thy warlike hands, thy mangled daughter here:
Thy other banished sons with this dear fight
Struck pale and bloodlesse, and thy brother I,
Even like a stony Image, cold and numme.
Ah now no more will I control my griefs,
Rent off thy silver hair, thy other hand
Gnawing with thy teeth, and be this dismal sight
The closing up of our most wretched eyes:
Now is a time to storm, why art thou still?

Ha, ha, ha,


Why do thou laugh? it fits not with this hour.


Why I have not another tear to shed:
Besides, this sorrow is an enemy,
And would usurp upon my watery eyes,
And make them blind with tributarie tears.
Then which way shall I find Reuenges Cave?
For these two heads do seem to speak to me,
And threat me, I shall never come to bliss,
Till all these mischiefs be returned again,
Even in their throats that have committed them.
Come let me see what task I have to do,
You heavy people, circle me about,
That I may turn me to each one of you,
And swear unto my soul to right your wrongs.
The vow is made, come Brother take a head,
And in this hand the other will I bear.
And Lauinia thou shall be employed in these things:
Bear thou my hand sweet wench between thy teeth:
As for thee boy, go get thee from my sight,
Thou art an Exile, and thou must not stay,
Hie to the Goths, and raise an army there,
And if you love me, as I think you do,
Let Us kiss and part, for we have much to do.

Farewell Andronicus my noble Father:
The woful'st man that ever lived in Rome:
Farewell proud Rome, til Lucius come again,
He loves his pledges dearer then his life:
Farewell Lauinia my noble sister,
O would thou were as thou to fore have been,
But now, nor Lucius nor Lauinia lives
But in oblivion and hateful griefs:
If Lucius live, he will requit your wrongs,
And make proud Saturnine and his Empress
Beg at the gates likes Tarquin and his Queen.
Now will I to the Goths and raise a power,
To be revenged on Rome and Saturnine.

So, so, now sit, and look you eat no more
Then will preserve just so much strength in us
As will revenge these bitter woes of ours.
Marcus unknit that sorrow-wreathen knot:
Thy Niece and I (poor Creatures) want our hands
And cannot passionate our tenfold grief,
Wirh foulded Arms. This poor right hand of mine,
Is left to tirranize upon my breast.
Who when my heart all mad with misery,
Beats in this hollow prison of my flesh,
Then thus I thumpe it down.
Thou Map of woe, that thus do talk in signs,
When thy poor heart beats without ragious beating,
Thou can not strike it thus to make it still?
Wound it with sighing girl, kill it with groans:
Or get some little knife between thy teeth,
And just against thy heart make thou a hole,
That all the tears that thy poor eyes let fall
May run into that sink, and soaking in,
Drown the lamenting fool, in Sea salt tears.

Fie brother fie, teach her not thus to lay
Such violent hands upon her tender life.

How now! Has sorrow made thee doat already?
Why Marcus, no man should be mad but I:
What violent hands can she lay on her life:
Ah, wherefore do thou urge the name of hands,
To bid Aeneas tell the tale twice ore
How Troy was burnt, and he made miserable?
O handle not the theme, to talk of hands,
Least we remember still that we have none,
Fie, fie how Frantiquely I square my talk
As if we should forget we had no hands:
If Marcus did not name the word of hands.
Come, lets fall too, and gentle girl eat this,
Here is no drink? Hark Marcus what she says,
I can interpret all her martir'd signs,
She says, she drinks no other drink but tears
Breu'd with her sorrow: mesh'd upon her cheeks,
Speechless complaynet, I will learn thy thought:
In thy dumb action, will I be as perfect
As begging Hermits in their holy prayers.
Thou shall not sighe nor hold thy stumps to heaven,
Nor wink, nor nod, nor kneel, nor make a sign,
But I (of these) will wrest an Alphabet,
And by still practice, learn to know thy meaning.

Good grandsire leave these bitter deep laments,
Make my Aunt merry, with some pleasing tale.

Alas, the tender boy in passion moved,
Does weep to see his grandsires heaviness.

Peace tender Sapling, thou art made of tears,
And tears will quickly melt thy life away.
What do thou strike at Marcus with knife.

At that that I have killed my Lord, a Flys


Out on the murderour: thou kil'st my heart,
Mine eyes cloi'd with view of Tirranie:
A deed of death done on the Innocent
Becoms not Titus broher: get thee gone,
I see thou art not for my company.

Alas (my Lord) I have but killed a fly.


But? How: if that Fly had a father and mother?
How would he hang his slender gilded wings
And buz lamenting doings in the air,
Poor harmless Fly,
That with his pretty buzing melody,
Came here to make us merry,
And thou have killed him.

Pardon me sir,
It was a black illfauour'd Fly,
Like to the Empress Moore, therefore I killed him.

O, o, o,
Then pardon me for reprehending thee,
For thou have done a Charitable deed:
Give me thy knife, I will insult on him,
Flattering my selfs, as if it were the Moore,
Come hither purposely to poison me.
There Is for thy self, and that's for Tamira: Ah sir,
Yet I think we are not brought so low,
But that between us, we can kill a Fly,
That comes in likeness of a Cole-blacke Moore.

Alas poor man, grief has so wrought on him,
He takes false shadows, for true substances.

Come, take away: Lauinia, go with me,
I Will to thy closset, and go read with thee
Sad stories, chanced in the times of old.
Come boy, and go with me, thy sight is young,
And thou shall read, when mine begin to dazell.

Help Grandsier help, my Aunt Lauinia,
Follows me every where I know not why.
Good Uncle Marcus see how swift she comes,
Alas sweet Aunt, I know not what you mean.

Stand by me Lucius, do not fear thy Aunt.


She loves thee boy too well to do thee harm


I when my father was in Rome she did.


What means my Niece Lauinia by these signs?


Fear not Lucius, somewhat does she mean:
See Lucius see, how much she makes of thee:
Some whether would she have thee go with her.
Ah boy, Cornelia never with more care
Read to her sons, then she has read to thee,
Sweet Poetry, and Tullies Orator:
Can thou not guess wherefore she plies thee thus?

My Lord I know not I, nor can I guess,
Unless some fit or frenzy do possess her:
For I have heard my Grandsier say full often,
Extremity of griefs would make men mad.
And I have read that Hecubae of Troy,
Ran mad through sorrow, that made me to fear,
Although my Lord, I know my noble Aunt,
Loves me as dear as ere my mother did,
And would not but in fury fright my youth,
Which made me down to throw my books, and fly
Causles perhaps, but pardon me sweet Aunt,
And Madam, if my Uncle Marcus go,
I will most willingly attend your Ladyship.

Lucius I will.


How now Lauinia, Marcus what means this?
Some book there is that she desires to see,
Which is it girl of these? Open them boy,
But thou art deeper read and better skild,
Come and take choice of all my Library,
And so beguile thy sorrow, till the heavens
Reveal the damned contriuer of this deed.
What book?
Why lifts she up her arms in sequence thus?

I think she means that there was more then one
Confederate in the fact, I more there was:
Or else to heaven she heaues them to revenge.

Lucius what book is that she tosseth so?


Grandsier it is Ouids Metamorphosis,
My mother gave it me.

For love of her that is gone,
Perhahs she culd it from among the rest.

Soft, so busily she turns the leaves,
Help her, what would she find? Lauinia shall I read?
This is the tragic tale of Philomel?
And treates of Tereus treason and his rape,
And rape I fear was root of thine annoy.

See brother see, note how she quotes the leaves


Lauinia, were thou thus surpised sweet girl,
Ravished and wronged as Philomela was?
Forced in the ruthlesse, vast, and gloomy woods?
See, see, I such a place there is where we did hunt,
(O had we never, never hunted there)
Patern'd by that the Poet here describes,
By nature made for murders and for rapes.

O why should nature build so foul a den,
Unless the Gods delight in tragedies?

Give signs sweet girl, for here are none but friends
What Roman Lord it was durst do the deed?
Or slunke not Saturnine, as Tarquin ersts,
That left the Camp to sin in Lucrece bed.

Sit down sweet Niece, brother sit down by me,
Apollo, Pallas, Jove, or Mercury,
Inspire me that I may this treason find.
My Lord look here, look here Lauinia.
This sandy plot is plain, guide if thou can
This after me, I have writ my name,
Without the help of any hand at all.
Cursed be that heart that forc'st us to that shift:
Write thou good Niece, and here display at last,
What God will have discovered for revenge,
Heaven guide thy pen to print thy sorrows plain,
That we may know the Traitors and the truth.

Oh do ye read my Lord what she has writs?
Stuprum, Chiron, Demetrius.

What, what, the lustful sons of Tamora,
Performers of this heinous bloody deed?

Magni Dominator poli,
Tam lentus audis scelera, tam lentus vides?

Oh calm thee gentle Lord: Although I know
There is enough written upon this earth,
To stir a mutiny in the mildest thoughts,
And arm the minds of infants to exclaimes.
My Lord kneel down with me: Lauinia kneel,
And kneel sweet boy, the Roman Hectors hope,
And swear with me, as with the woeful Feere
And father of that chaste dishonored Dame,
Lord Iunius Brutus swear for Lucrece rape,
That we will prosecute (by good advise)
Mortal revenge upon these traytorous Goths,
And see their blood, or die with this reproach.

It Is sure enough, and you knew how.
But if you hunt these Beare-whelpes, then beware
The Dam will wake, and if she wind you once,
She Is with the Lion deeply still in league.
And Iulls him whilst she palyeth on her back,
And when he sleeps will she do what she list.
You are a young huntsman Marcus, let it alone:
And come, I will go get a leaf of brass,
And with a Gad of steel will write these words,
And lay it by: the angry Northern wind
Will blow these sands like Sibels leaves abroad,
And where is your lesson then. Boy what say you?

I say my Lord, that if I were a man,
Their mothers bedchamber should not be safe,
For these bad bondmen to the yoke of Rome.

I that is my boy, thy father has full often,
For his ungrateful country done the like.

And Uncle so will I, and if I live.


Come go with me into mine Armorie,
Lucius I Will fit thee, and withal, my boy
Shall carry from me to the Empress sons,
Presents that I intend to send them both,
Come, come, thou'st do thy message, will thou not?

I with my dagger in their bosoms Grandsire:


No boy not so, I Will teach thee another course,
Lauinia come, Marcus look to my house,
Lucius and I Will go brave it at the Court,
I marry will we sir, and we will be waited on.

O heavens! Can you hear a good man groan
And not relent, or not compassion him?
Marcus attend him in his ecstasy,
That has more scars of sorrow in his heart,
Then foe-mens marks upon his battered shield,
But yet so just, that he will not revenge,
Revenge the heavens for old Andronicus.

Demetrius heeres the son of Lucius,
He has some message to deliver us.

I some mad message from his mad Grandfather.


My Lords, with all the humbleness I may,
I greet your honors from Andronicus,
And pray the Roman Gods confound you both.

Gramercie lovely Lucius, what is the news?
For villanie's marked with rape. May it please you,
My Grandsire well advised has sent by me,
The goodliest weapons of his Armorie,
To gratify your honorable youth,
The hope of Rome, for so he bad me say:
And so I do and with his gifts present
Your Lordships, when ever you have need,
You may be armed and appointed well,
And so I leave you both: like bloody villains.

What Is here? a scrole, and written round about?
Let Us see.
Integer vitae scelerisque purus, non egit maury iaculis nec arcus.

O it is a verse in Horace, I know it well.
I read it in the Grammar long ago.

I just, a verse in Horace: right, you have it,
Now what a thing it is to be an Ass?
Here Is no sound jest, the old man has found their guilt,
And sends the weapons wrapped about with lines,
That wound (beyond their feeling) to the quick:
But were our witty Empress well a foot,
She would applaud Andronicus conceit:
But let her rest, in her unrest a while.
And now young Lords, wa'st not a happy star
Led us to Rome strangers, and more then so;
Captives, to be advanced to this height?
It did me good before the Palace gate,
To brave the Tribune in his brothers hearing.

But me more good, to see so great a Lord
Basely insinuate, and send us gifts.

Had he not reason Lord Demetrius?
Did you not use his daughter very friendly?

I would we had a thousand Roman Dames
At such a bay, by turn to serve our lust.

A charitable wish, and full of love.


Here lack's but you mother for to say, Amen.


And that would she for twenty thousand more.


Come, let us go, and pray to all the Gods
For our beloved mother in her pains.

Pray to the devils, the gods have given us over.


Why do the Emperors trumpets flourish thus?


Belike for joy the Emperor has a son.


Soft, who comes here?


Good morrow Lords:
O tell me, did you see Aaron the Moore?

Well, more or less, or nere a whit at all,
Here Aaron is, and what with Aaron now?

Oh gentle Aaron, we are all undone,
Now help, or woe betide thee evermore.

Why, what a catterwalling do thou keep?
What do thou wrap and fumble in thine arms?

O that which I would hide from heavens eye,
Our Empress shame, and stately Romes disgrace,
She is delivered Lords, she is delivered.

To whom?


I mean she is brought a bed?


Well God give her good rest.
What has he sent her?

A devil.


Why then she is the Devils Dam: a joyful issue.


A ioylesse, dismal, black and, sorrowful issue,
Here is the babe as loathsome as a toad,
Among'st the fairest breeders of our clime,
The Empress sends it thee, thy stamp, thy seal,
And bids thee christen it with thy daggers point.

Out you whore, is black so base a hue?
Sweet blowse, you are a beauteous blossom sure.

Villain what have thou done?


That which thou can not undo.


Thou have undone our mother.


And therein hellish dog, thou have undone,
Woe to her chance, and damned her loathed choice,
Accur'st the offspring of so foul a fiend.

It shall not live.


It shall not die.


Aaron it must, the mother wills it so.


What, must it Nurse? Then let no man but I
Do execution on my flesh and blood.

I Will broach the Tadpole on my Rapiers point:
Nurse give it me, my sword shall soon dispatch it.

Sooner this sword shall plough thy bowels up.
Stay murtherous villains, will you kill your brother?
Now by the burning Tapers of the sky,
That sh'one so brightly when this Boy was got,
He dies upon my Semitars sharp point,
That touches this my first borne son and heir.
I tell you young-lings, not Enceladus
With all his threatening band of Typhons brood,
Nor great Alcides, nor the God of war,
Shall ceaze this prey out of his fathers hands:
What, what, ye sanguine shallow hearted Boys,
Ye white-limb'd walls, ye Alehouse painted signs,
Cole-blacke is better then another hue,
In that it scorns to bear another hue:
For all the water in the Ocean,
Can never turn the Swans black legs to white,
Although she laue them hourly in the flood:
Tell the Empress from me, I am of age
To keep mine own, excuse it how she can.

Will thou betray thy noble mistress thus?


My mistress is my mistress: this my self,
The vigor, and the picture of my youth:
This, before all the world do I prefer,
This manger all the world will I keep safe,
Or some of you shall smoke for it in Rome.

By this our mother is for ever shamed.


Rome will despise her for this foul escape.


The Emperor in his rage will doom her death.


I blush to think upon this ignominy.


Why there is the privilege your beauty bears:
Fie treacherous hue, that will betray with blushing
The close enacts and counsels of the heart:
Here Is a young Lad framed of another leere,
Look how the black slave smiles upon the father;
As who should say, old Lad I am thine own.
He is your brother Lords, sensibly fed
Of that self blood that first gave life to you,
And from that womb where you imprisoned were
He is infranchised and come to light:
Nay he is your brother by the surer side,
Although my seal be stamped in his face.

Aaron what shall I say unto the Empress?


Advise thee Aaron, what is to be done,
And we will all subscribe to thy advise:
Save thou the child, so we may all be safe.

Then sit we down and let us all consult.
My son and I will have the wind of you:
Keep there, now talk at pleasure of your safety.

How many women saw this child of his?


Why so brave Lords, when we join in league
I am a Lamb: but if you brave the Moore,
The chafed Bore, the mountain Lioness,
The Ocean swells not so at Aaron storms:
But say again, how many saw the child?

Cornelia, the midwife, and my self,
And none else but the delivered Empress.

The Empress, the Midwife, and your self,
Two may keep counsel, when the the third's away:
Go to the Empress, tell her this I said,
Week, week, so cries a Pigge prepared to the spit.

What mean thou Aaron?
Wherefore did thou this?

O Lord sir, it is a deed of policy?
Shall she live to betray this guilt of our's:
A long tongued babbling Gossip? No Lords no:
And now be it known to you my full intent.
Not far, one Muliteus my Countryman
His wife but yesternight was brought to bed,
His child is like to her, fair as you are:
Go pack with him, and give the mother gold,
And tell them both the circumstance of all,
And how by this their Child shall be aduaunc'd,
And be received for the Emperors heir,
And substituted in the place of mine,
To calm this tempest whirling in the Court,
And let the Emperor dandle him for his own.
Hark ye Lords, ye see I have given her physic,
And you must needs bestow her funeral,
The fields are near, and you are gallant Grooms:
This done, see that you take no longer days
But send the Midwife presently to me.
The Midwife and the Nurse well made away,
Then let the Ladies tattle what they please.

Aaron I see thou will not ttust the air with secrets.


For this care of Tamora,
Her self, and hers are highly bound to thee.

Now to the Goths, as swift as Swallow flies,
There to dispose this treasure in mine arms,
And secretly to greet the Empress friends:
Come on you thick-lipt-slaue, I Will bear you hence,
For it is you that puts us to our shifts:
I Will make you feed on berries, and on roots,
And feed on curds and whay, and suck the Goat,
And cabin in a Cave, and bring you up
To be a warrior, and command a Camp.

Come Marcus, come, kinsmen this is the way.
Sir Boy let me see your Archerie,
Look ye draw home enough, and it is there straight:
Terras Astrea reliquit, be you remembered Marcus.
She Is gone, she is fled, sirs take you to your tools,
You Cosens shall go sound the Ocean:
And cast your nets, happily you may find her in the Sea,
Yet there is as little justice as at Land:
No Publius and Sempronius, you must do it,
It Is you must dig with Mattocke, and with Spade,
And pierce the inmost Center of the earth:
Then when you come to Platoes Region,
I pray you deliver him this petition,
Tell him it is for justice, and for aid,
And that it comes from old Andronicus,
Shaken with sorrows in ungrateful Rome,
Ah Rome! Well, well, I made thee miserable,
What time I threw the peoples suffrages
On him that thus does tyrannize ore me.
Go get you gone, and pray be careful all,
And leave you not a man of war unsearched,
This wicked Emperor may have shipped her hence,
And kinsmen then we may go pipe for justice.

O Publius is not this a heavy case
To see thy Noble Uncle thus distract?

Therefore my Lords it highly us concerns,
By day and night to attend him carefully:
And feed his humor kindly as we may,
Till time beget some careful remedy.

Kinsmen, his sorrows are past remedy.
Join with the Goths, and with reuengefull war,
Take wreake on Rome for this ingratitude,
And vengeance on the Traitor Saturnine.

Publius how now? how now my Masters?
What have you met with her?

No my good Lord, but Pluto sends you word,
If you will have revenge from hell you shall,
Marry for justice she is so employed,
He thinks with Jove in heaven, or some where else:
So that perforce you must needs stay a time.

He does me wrong to feed me with delays,
I Will diue into the burning Lake below,
And pull her out of Acaron by the heels.
Marcus we are but shrubs, no Cedars we,
No big-bon'd-men, framed of the Cyclops size,
But metal Marcus, steel to the very back,
Yet wrung with wrongs more then our back can bear:
And since there is no justice in earth nor hell,
We will solicit heaven, and move the Gods
To send down Justice for to wreake our wongs:
Come to this gear, you are a good Archer Marcus.
Ad Iouem, that is for you: here ad Appollonem,
Ad Martem, that is for my self,
Here Boy to Pallas, here to Mercury,
To Saturnine, to Caius, not to Saturnine,
You were as good to shoot against the wind.
Too it Boy, Marcus loose when I bid:
Of my word, I have written to effect,
There Is not a God left vnsollicited.

Kinsmen, shoot all your shafts into the Court,
We will afflict the Emperor in his pride.

Now Masters draw, Oh well said Lucius:
Good Boy in Virgoes lap, give it Pallas.

My Lord, I aim a Mile beyond the Moon,
Your letter is with Jupiter by this.

Ha, ha, Publius, Publius, what have thou done?
See, see, thou have, shot off one of Taurus horns.

This was the sport my Lord, when Publius shot,
The Bull being gal'd, gave Aries such a knock,
That down fell both the Rams horns in the Court,
And who should find them but the Empress villain:
She laughed, and told the Moore he should not choose
But give them to his Master for a present.

Why there it goes, God give your Lordship joy.


News, news, from heaven,
Marcus the poast is come.
Sirrah, what tidings? have you any letters?
Shall I have Justice, what says Jupiter?

Ho the Iibbetmaker, he says that he has taken them down again, for the man
must not be hanged till the next week


But what says Jupiter I ask thee?


Alas sir I know not Jupiter:
I never drank with him in all my life.

Why villain art not thou the Carrier?


I of my Pigions sir, nothing else.


Why, did thou not come from heaven?


From heaven? Alas sir, I never came there, God forbid I should be so bold, to
press to heaven in my young days. Why I am going with my pigeons to the
Tribunal Plebs, to take up a matter of brawle, betwixt my Uncle, and one of
the Emperialls men


Why sir, that is as fit as can be to serve for your Oration, and let him
deliver the Pigions to the Emperor from you


Tell me, can you deliver an Oration to the Emperor with a Grace?


Nay truly sir, I could never say grace in all my life.


Sirrah come hither, make no more ado,
But give your Pigeons to the Emperor,
By me thou shall have Justice at his hands.
Hold, hold, mean while here is money for thy charges.
Give me pen and ink.
Sirrah, can you with a Grace deliver a Supplication?

I sir


Then here is a Supplication for you, and when you come to him, at the first
approach you must kneel, then kiss his foot, then deliver up your Pigeons,
and then look for your reward. I Will be at hand sir, see you do it bravely


I warrant you sir, let me alone.


Sirrah have thou a knife? Come let me see it.
Here Marcus, fold it in the Oration,
For thou have made it like an humble Suppliant:
And when thou have given it the Emperor,
Knock at my door, and tell me what he says.

God be with you sir, I will.


Come Marcus let us go, Publius follow me.


Why Lords,
What wrongs are these? was ever seen
An Emperor in Rome thus ouerborne,
Troubled, Confronted thus, and for the extent
Of eg all justice, used in such contempt?
My Lords, you know the mightfull Gods,
(How ever these disturbers of our peace
Buz in the peoples ears) there naught has past,
But even with law against the wilful Sons
Of old Andronicus. And what and if
His sorrows have so ouerwhelm'd his wits,
Shall we be thus afflicted in his wreakes,
His fits, his frenzy, and his bitterness?
And now he writes to heaven for his redress.
See, heeres to Jove, and this to Mercury,
This to Apollo, this to the God of war:
Sweet scrowles to fly about the streets of Rome:
What Is this but Libelling against the Senate,
And blazoning our Injustice every where?
A goodly humor, is it not my Lords?
As who would say, in Rome no Justice were.
But if I live, his fained ecstasies
Shall be no shelter to these outrages:
But he and his shall know, that Justice lives
In Saturninus health; whom if he sleep,
He Will so awake, as he in fury shall
Cut off the proud'st Conspirator that lives.

My gracious Lord, my lovely Saturnine,
Lord of my life, Commander of my thoughts,
Calm thee, and bear the faults of Titus age,
The effects of sorrow for his valiant Sons,
Whose loss has pier'st him deep, and scared his heart;
And rather comfort his distressed plight,
Then prosecute the meanest or the best
For these contempts. Why thus it shall become
High witted Tamora to gloss with all:
But Titus, I have touched thee to the quick,
Thy life blood out: If Aaron now be wise,
Then is all safe, the Anchor's in the Port.
How now good fellow, would thou speak with us?

Yea forsooth, and your Mistership be Imperial.


Empress I am, but yonder sits the Emperor.


It Is he; God and Saint Stephen give you good den;
I have brought you a Letter, and a couple of Pigions here.

Go take him away, and hang him presently.


How much money must I have?


Come sirrah you must be hanged.


Hanged? ber Lady, then I have brought up a neck to a fair end.


Despightfull and intolerable wrongs,
Shall I endure this monstrous villainy?
I know from whence this same devise proceeds:
May this be borne? As if his traytrous Sons,
That died by law for murder of our Brother,
Have by my means been butchered wrongfully?
Go dragge the villain hither by the hair,
Nor Age, nor Honor, shall shape privilege:
For this proud mock, I Will be thy slaughter man:
Sly frantic wretch, that holp'st to make me great,
In hope thy self should govern Rome and me.

What news with thee Emillius?


Arm my Lords, Rome never had more cause,
The Goths have gathered head, and with a power
Of high resolved men, bent to the spoil
They hither march amain, under conduct
Of Lucius, Son to old Andronicus:
Who threats in course of this revenge to do
As much as ever Coriolanus did.

Is warlike Lucius General of the Goths?
These tidings nip me, and I hang the head
As flowers with frost, or grass beat down with storms:
I, now begins our sorrows to approach,
It Is he the common people love so much,
My self has often heard them say,
(When I have walked like a private man)
That Lucius banishment was wrongfully,
And they have wished that Lucius were their Emperor.

Why should you fear? Is not our City strong?


I, but the Citizens favor Lucius,
And will revolt from me, to succor him.

King, be thy thoughts Imperious like thy name.
Is the Sun dimmed, that Gnats do fly in it?
The Eagle suffers little Birds to sing,
And is not careful what they mean thereby,
Knowing that with the shadow of his wings,
He can at pleasure stint their melody.
Even so may thou, the giddy men of Rome,
Then cheer thy spirit, for know thou Emperor,
I will enchaunt the old Andronicus,
With words more sweet, and yet more dangerous
Then baits to fish, or honey stalks to sheep,
When as the one is wounded with the bait,
The other rotted with delicious food.

But he will not entreat his Son for us.


If Tamora entreat him, then he will,
For I can smooth and fill his aged ear,
With golden promises, that were his heart
Almost Impregnable, his old ears deaf,
Yet should both ear and heart obey my tongue.
Go thou before to our Ambassador,
Say, that the Emperor requests a parley
Of warlike Lucius, and appoint the meeting.

Emillius do this message Honorably,
And if he stand in Hostage for his safety,
Bid him demand what pledge will please him best.

Your bidding shall I do effectually.


Now will I to that old Andronicus,
And temper him with all the Art I have,
To pluck proud Lucius from the warlike Goths.
And now sweet Emperor be blithe again,
And bury all thy fear in my devises.

Then go successantly and plead for him.


Approved warriors, and my faithful Friends,
I have received Letters from great Rome,
Which signifies what hate they bear their Emperor,
And how desirous of our sight they are.
Therefore great Lords, be as your Titles witness,
Imperious and impatient of your wrongs,
And wherein Rome has done you any scathe,
Let him make treble satisfaction.

Brave slip, sprung from the Great Andronicus,
Whose name was once our terror, now our comfort,
Whose high exploits, and honorable Deeds,
Ungrateful Rome requites with foul contempt:
Behold in us, we will follow where thou lead'st,
Like stinging Bees in hottest Summers day,
Led by their Master to the flowred fields,
And be aueng'd on cursed Tamora:
And as he says, so say we all with him.

I humbly thank him, and I thank you all.
But who comes here, led by a lusty Goth?

Renowned Lucius, from our troops I straid,
To gaze upon a ruinous Monastery,
And as I earnestly did fix mine eye
Upon the wasted building, suddenly
I heard a child cry underneath a wall:
I made unto the noise, when soon I heard,
The crying babe controlled with this discourse:
Peace Tawny slave, half me, and half thy Dam,
Did not thy Hue bewray whose brat thou art?
Had nature lent thee, but thy Mothers look,
Villain thou might have been an Emperor.
But where the Bull and Cow are both milk-white,
They never do beget a cole-blacke-Calfe:
Peace, villain peace, even thus he rates the babe,
For I must bear thee to a trusty Goth,
Who when he knows thou art the Empress babe,
Will hold thee dearly for thy Mothers sake.
With this, my weapon drawn I rusht upon him,
Surpised him suddenly, and brought him hither
To use, as you think neeedefull of the man.

Oh worthy Goth, this is the incarnate devil,
That robbed Andronicus of his good hand:
This is the Pearl that pleased your Empress eye,
And here is the Base Fruit of his burning lust.
Say wall-ey'd slave, whether would thou convey
This growing Image of thy fiend-like face?
Why do not speak? what deaf? Not a word?
A halter Soldiers, hang him on this Tree,
And by his side his Fruit of Bastardie.

Touch not the Boy, he is of Royal blood.


Too like the Sire for ever being good.
First hang the Child that he may see it sprall,
A sight to vex the Fathers soul withal.

Get me a Ladder Lucius, save the Child,
And bear it from me to the Empress:
If thou do this, I Will show thee wondrous things,
That highly may advantage thee to hear;
If thou will not, befall what may befall,
I Will speak no more: but vengeance rot you all.

Say on, and if it please me which thou speak,
Thy child shall live, and I will see it Nourisht.

And if it please thee? why assure thee Lucius,
'Twill vex thy soul to hear what I shall speak:
For I must talk of Murders, Rapes, and Massacres,
Acts of Blacke-night, abominable Deeds,
Complots of Mischief, Treason, Villainies
Ruthful to hear, yet pittiously preform'd,
And this shall all be buried by my death,
Unless thou swear to me my Child shall live.

Tell on thy mind,
I say thy Child shall live.

Swear that he shall, and then I will begin.


Who should I swear by,
Thou beleeuest no God,
That granted, how can thou believe an oath?

What if I do not, as indeed I do not,
Yet for I know thou art Religious,
And have a thing within thee, called Conscience,
With twenty Popish tricks and Ceremonies,
Which I have seen thee careful to observe:
Therefore I urge thy oath, for that I know
An Idiot holds his Bauble for a God,
And keeps the oath which by that God he swears,
To that I Will urge him: therefore thou shall vow
By that same God, what God so ere it be
That thou adorest, and have in reverence,
To save my Boy, to nourish and bring him up,
Ore else I will discover naught to thee.

Even by my God I swear to to thee I will.


First know thou,
I be got him on the Empress.

Oh most Insatiate luxurious woman!


Tut Lucius, this was but a deed of Charity,
To that which thou shall hear of me anon,
'Twas her two Sons that murdered Bassianus,
They cut thy Sisters tongue, and ravished her,
And cut her hands off, and trimmed her as thou saw.

Oh detestable villain!
Call'st thou that Trimming?

Why she was washed, and cut, and trimmed,
And 'twas trim sport for them that had the doing of it.

Oh barbarous beastly villains like thy self!


Indeed, I was their Tutor to instruct them.
That Codding spirit had they from their Mother,
As sure a Card as ever won the Set:
That bloody mind I think they learned of me,
As true a Dog as ever fought at head.
Well, let my Deeds be witness of my worth:
I trayn'd thy Brethren to that guilefull Hole,
Where the dead Corpse of Bassianus lay:
I wrote the Letter, that thy Father found,
And hid the Gold within the Letter mentioned.
Confederate with the Queen, and her two Sons,
And what not done, that thou have cause to rue,
Wherein I had no stroke of Mischeife in it.
I played the Cheater for thy Fathers hand,
And when I had it, drew my self apart,
And almost broke my heart with extreme laughter.
I pried me through the Creuice of a Wall,
When for his hand, he had his two Sons heads,
Beheld his tears, and laughed so heartily,
That both mine eyes were rainie like to his:
And when I told the Empress of this sport,
She sounded almost at my pleasing tale,
And for my tidings, gave me twenty kisses.

What can thou say all this, and never blush?


I, like a black Dog, as the saying is.


Art thou not sorry for these heinous deeds?


I, that I had not done a thousand more:
Even now I curse the day, and yet I think
Few come within few compass of my curse,
Wherein I did not some Notorious ill,
As kill a man, or else devise his death,
Ravish a Maid, or plot the way to do it,
Accuse some Innocent, and forswear my self,
Set deadly Enmity between two Friends,
Make poor men's Cattle break their necks,
Set fire on Barnes and Haystackes in the night,
And bid the Owners quench them with the tears:
Often have I dig'd up dead men from their graves,
And set them upright at their dear Friends door,
Even when their sorrows almost was forgot,
And on their skins, as on the Bark of Trees,
Have with my knife carved in Roman Letters,
Let not your sorrow die, though I am dead.
Tut, I have done a thousand dreadful things
As willingly, as one would kill a Fly,
And nothing greeues me heartily indeed,
But that I cannot do ten thousand more.

Bring down the devil, for he must not die
So sweet a death as hanging presently.

If there be devils, would I were a devil,
To live and burn in everlasting fire,
So I might have your company in hell,
But to torment you with my bitter tongue.

Sirs stop his mouth, and let him speak no more.


My Lord, there is a Messenger from Rome
Desires to be admitted to your presence.

Let him come near.
Welcome Emillius, what the news from Rome?

Lord Lucius, and you Princes of the Goths,
The Roman Emperor greetes you all by me,
And for he understands you are in Arms,
He craves a parley at your Fathers house
Willing you to demand your Hostages,
And they shall be immediately delivered.

What says our General?


Emillius, let the Emperor give his pledges
Unto my Father, and my Uncle Marcus,
And we will come I march away.

Thus in this strange and sad Habilliament,
I will encounter with Andronicus,
And say, I am Revenge sent from below,
To join with him and right his heinous wrongs:
Knock at his study where they say he keeps,
To ruminate strange plots of dire Revenge,
Tell him Revenge is come to join with him,
And work confusion on his Enemies.

Who does mollest my Contemplation?
Is it your trick to make me open the door,
That so my sad decrees may fly away,
And all my study be, to no effect?
You are deceived, for what I mean to do,
See here in bloody lines I have set down:
And what is written shall be executed.

Titus, I am come to talk with thee,


No not a word: how can I grace my talk,
Wanting a hand to give it action,
Thou have the ods of me, therefore no more.

If thou did know me,
Thou would talk with me.

I am not mad, I know thee well enough,
Witness this wretched stump,
Witness these crimson lines,
Witness these Trenches made by grief and care,
Witness the trying day, and heavy night,
Witness all sorrow, that I know thee well
For our proud Empress, Mighty Tamora:
Is not thy coming for my other hand?

Know thou sad man, I am not Tamora,
She is thy Enemy, and I thy Friend,
I am Revenge sent from the infernal Kingdom,
To ease the gnawing Vulture of the mind,
By working wreakefull vengeance on my Foes:
Come down and welcome me to this worlds light,
Confer with me of Murder and of Death,
There Is not a hollow Cave or lurking place,
No Vast obscurity, or Misty vale,
Where bloody Murder or detested Rape,
Can couch for fear, but I will find them out,
And in their ears tell them my dreadful name,
Revenge, which makes the foul offenders quake.

Art thou Revenge? and art thou sent to me,
To be a torment to mine Enemies?

I am, therefore come down and welcome me.


Do me some service ere I come to thee:
Lo by thy side where Rape and Murder stands,
Now give some surance that thou art Revenge,
Stab them, or tear them on thy Chariot wheels,
And then I Will come and be thy Waggoner,
And whirle along with thee about the Globes.
Provide thee two proper Palfries, as black as Iet,
To hale thy vengefull Wagon swift away,
And find out Murder in their guilty cares.
And when thy Car is laden with their heads,
I will dismount, and by the Wagon wheel,
Trot like a Servile footeman all day long,
Even from Eptons rising in the East,
Until his very downfall in the Sea.
And day by day I Will do this heavy task,
So thou destroy Rapine and Murder there.

These are my Ministers, and come with me.


Are them thy Ministers, what are they called?


Rape and Murder, therefore called so,
Cause they take vengeance of such kind of men.

Good Lord how like the Empress Son? they are,
And you the Empress: But we worldly men,
Have miserable mad mistaking eyes:
Oh sweet Revenge, now do I come to thee,
And if one arms imbracement will content thee,
I will embrace thee in it by and by.

This closing with him, fits his Lunacie,
What ere I forge to feed his braine-sicke fits,
Do you uphold, and maintain in your speeches,
For now he firmly takes me for Revenge,
And being Credulous in this mad thought,
I Will make him send for Lucius his Son,
And whilst I at a Banquet hold him sure,
I Will find some cunning practice out of hand
To scatter and disperse the giddle Goths,
Or at the least make them his Enemies:
See here he comes, and I must play my theme.

Long have I been forlorn, and all for thee,
Welcome dread Fury to my woofull house,
Rapine and Murder, you are welcome too,
How like the Empress and her Sons you are.
Well are you fitted, had you but a Moore,
Could not all hell afford you such a devil?
For well I wot the Empress never wags;
But in her company there is a Moore.
And would you represent our Queen aright
It were convenient you had such a devil:
But welcome as you are, what shall we do?

What would thou have us do Andronicus?


Show me a Murderer, I Will deal with him.


Show me a Villain that has done a Rape,
And I am sent to be revenged on him.

Show me a thousand that have done thee wrong,
And I Will be revenged on them all.

Look round about the wicked streets of Rome,
And when thou find'st a man that is like thy self,
Good Murder stab him, he is a Murderer.
Go thou with him, and when it is thy hap
To find another that is like to thee,
Good Rapine stab him, he is a Rauisher.
Go thou with them, and in the Emperors Court,
There is a Queen attended by a Moore,
Well may thou know her by thy own proportion,
For up and down she does resemble thee.
I pray thee do on them some violent death,
They have been violent to me and mine.

Well have thou lesson'd us, this shall we do.
But would it please thee good Andronicus,
To send for Lucius thy thrice Valiant Son,
Who leads toward Rome a Band of Warlike Goths,
And bid him come and Banquet at thy house.
When he is here, even at thy Solemn Feast,
I will bring in the Empress and her Sons,
The Emperor himself, and all thy Foes,
And at thy mercy shall they stoop, and kneel,
And on them shall thou ease, thy angry heart:
What says Andronicus to this devise?

Marcus my Brother, it is sad Titus calls,
Go gentle Marcus to thy Nephew Lucius,
Thou shall enquire him out among the Goths,
Bid him repair to me, and bring with him
Some of the chiefest Princes of the Goths,
Bid him encampe his Soldiers where they are,
Tell him the Emperor, and the Empress too,
Feasts at my house, and he shall Feast with them,
This do thou for my love, and so let him,
As he regards his aged Fathers life.

This will I do, and soon return again.


Now will I hence about thy business,
And take my Ministers along with me.

Nay, nay, let Rape and Murder stay with me,
Or else I Will call my Brother back again,
And cleave to no revenge but Lucius.

What say you Boys, will you bide with him,
Whiles I go tell my Lord the Emperor,
How I have governed our determined jest?
Yield to his Humor, smooth and speak him fair,
And tarry with him till I turn again.

I know them all, though they suppose me mad,
And will ore-reach them in their own devises,
A pair of cursed hell hounds and their Dam.

Madam depart at pleasure, leave us here.


Farewell Andronicus, revenge now goes
To lay a complot to betray thy Foes.

I know thou doo'st, and sweet revenge farewell.


Tell us old man, how shall we be employed?


Tut, I have work enough for you to do,
Publius come hither, Caius, and Valentine.

What is your will?


Know you these two?


The Empress Sons
I take them, Chiron, Demetrius.

Fie Publius, fie, thou art too much deceau'd,
The one is Murder, Rape is the others name,
And therefore bind them gentle Publius,
Caius, and Valentine, lay hands on them,
Often have you heard me wish for such an hour,
And now I find it, therefore bind them sure,

Villains forbear, we are the Empress Sons.


And therefore do we, what we are commanded.
Stop close their mouths, let them not speak a word,
Is he sure bound, look that you bind them fast.

Come, come Lauinia, look, thy Foes are bound,
Sirs stop their mouths, let them not speak to me,
But let them hear what fearful words I utter.
Oh Villains, Chiron, and Demetrius,
Here stands the spring whom you have stained with mud,
This goodly Summer with your Winter mixed,
You killed her husband, and for that vil'd fault,
Two of her Brothers were condemned to death,
My hand cut off, and made a merry jest,
Both her sweet Hands, her Tongue, and that more dear
Then Hands or tongue, her spotless Chastity,
Inhumaine Traitors, you constrained and for'st.
What would you say, if I should let you speak?
Villains for shame you could not beg for grace.
Hark Wretches, how I mean to martyr you,
This one Hand yet is left, to cut your throats,
Whilst that Lauinia tweene her stumps does hold:
The Basin that receives your guilty blood.
You know your Mother means to feast with me,
And calls herself Revenge, and thinks me mad.
Hark Villains, I will grin'd your bones to dust,
And with your blood and it, I Will make a Paste,
And of the Paste a Coffen I will rear,
And make two Pasties of your shameful Heads,
And bid that strumpet your unhallowed Dam,
Like to the earth swallow her increase.
This is the Feast, that I have bid her to,
And this the Banquet she shall surfeit on,
For worse then Philomel you vsd my Daughter,
And worse then Progne, I will be revenged,
And now prepare your throats: Lauinia come.
Receive the blood, and when that they are dead,
Let me go grin'd their Bones to powder small,
And with this hateful Liquor temper it,
And in that Paste let their vil'd Heads be bakte,
Come, come, be every one officious,
To make this Banquet, which I wish might prove,
More stern and bloody then the Centaures Feast.
So now bring them in, for I Will play the Cook,
And see them ready, against their Mother comes.

Uncle Marcus, since it is my Fathers mind
That I repair to Rome, I am content.

And ours with thine befall, what Fortune will.


Good Uncle take you in this barbarous Moore,
This Ravenous Tiger, this accursed devil,
Let him receive no sustenance, fetter him,
Till he be brought unto the Emperous face,
For testimony of her foul proceedings.
And see the Ambush of our Friends be strong,
If ere the Emperor means no good to us.

Some devil whisper curses in my ear,
And prompt me that my tongue may utter forth,
The Venomous Malice of my swelling heart.

Away Inhumaine Dog, Unhallowed Slave,
Sirs, help our Uncle, to convey him in,
The Trumpets show the Emperor is at hand.

What, has the Firemament more Suns then one?


What boots it thee to call thy self a Sun?


Romes Emperor and Nephewe break the parle
These quarrels must be quietly debated,
The Feast is ready which the careful Titus,
Has ordained to an Honorable end,
For Peace, for Love, for League, and good to Rome:
Please you therefore draw nie and take your places.

Marcus we will.


Welcome my gracious Lord,
Welcome Dread Queen,
Welcome ye Warlike Goths, welcome Luciu^,
And welcome all: although the cheer be poor,
'Twill fill your stomachs, please you eat of it.

Why art thou thus attired Andronicus?


Because I would be sure to have all well,
To entertain your Highness, and your Empress.

We are beholding to you good Andronicus?


And if your Highness knew my heart, you were:
My Lord the Emperor resolve me this,
Was it well done of rash Virginius,
To slay his daughter with his own right hand,
Because she was enfor'st, stained, and deflowered?

It was Andronicus.


Your reason, Mighty Lord?


Because the Girl, should not suruine her shame,
And by her presence still renew his sorrows.

A reason mighty, strong, and effectual,
A pattern, president, and lively warrant,
For me (most wretched) to perform the like:
Die, die, Lauinia, and thy shame with thee,
And with thy shame, thy Fathers sorrow die.

What have done, unnatural and unkind?


Killed her for whom my tears have made me blind.
I am as woeful as Virginius was,
And have a thousand times more cause then he.

What was she ravished? tell who did the deed,


Wilt please you eat,
Wilt please your Highness feed?

Why have thou slain thine only Daughter?


Not I, 'twas Chiron and Demetrius,
They ravished her, and cut away her tongue,
And they, 'twas they, that did her all this wrong.

Go fetch them hither to us presently.


Why there they are both, baked in that Pie,
Whereof their Mother dantily has fed,
Eating the flesh that she herself has bred.
It Is true, it is true, witness my knives sharp point.

Die frantic wretch, for this accursed deed.


Can the Sons eye, behold his Father bleed?
There Is meede for meede, death for a deadly deed.

You sad faced men, people and Sons of Rome,
By vprores seuer'd like a flight of Foul,
Scattred by winds and high tempestuous gusts:
Oh let me teach you how, to knit again
This scattred Corn, into one mutual sheafe,
These broken limbs again into one body.

Let Rome herself be bane unto herself,
And she whom mighty kingdoms cursie too,
Like a forlorn and desperate castaway,
Do shameful execution on her self.
But if my frostie signs and chaps of age,
Grave witnesses of true experience,
Cannot induce you to attend my words,
Speak Romes dear friend, as 'erst our Auncestor,
When with his solemn tongue he did discourse
To loue-sicke Didoes sad attending ear,
The story of that balefull burning night,
When subtle Greeks surpised King Priams Troy:
Tell us what Sinon has bewicht our ears,
Or who has brought the fatal engine in,
That gives our Troy, our Rome the civil wound.
My heart is not compact of flint nor steel,
Nor can I utter all our bitter grief,
But floods of tears will drown my Oratorie,
And break my very vttrance, even in the time
When it should move you to attend me most,
Lending your kind hand Commiseration.
Here is a Captain, let him tell the tale,
Your hearts will throb and weep to hear him speak.

This Noble Auditory, be it known to you,
That cursed Chiron and Demetrius
Were they that murdered our Emperors Brother,
And they it were that ravished our Sister,
For their fell faults our Brothers were beheaded,
Our Fathers tears despised, and basely cousen'd,
Of that true hand that fought Romes quarrel out,
And sent her enemies unto the grave.
Lastly, my self unkindly banished,
The gates shut on me, and turned weeping out,
To beg relief among Romes Enemies,
Who drowned their enmity in my true tears,
And opened their arms to embrace me as a Friend:
And I am turned forth, be it known to you,
That have preserved her welfare in my blood,
And from her bosom took the Enemies point,
Sheathing the steel in my aduentrous body.
Alas you know, I am no Vaunter I,
My scars can witness, dumb although they are,
That my report is just and full of truth:
But soft, me thinks I do digress too much,
Cyting my worthless praise: Oh pardon me,
For when no Friends are by, men praise themselves,

Now is my turn to speak: Behold this Child,
Of this was Tamora delivered,
The issue of an Irreligious Moore,
Chief Architect and plotter of these woes,
The Villain is alive in Titus house,
And as he is, to witness this is true.
Now judge what course had Titus to revenge
These wrongs, unspeakable past patience,
Or more then any living man could bear.
Now you have heard the truth, what say you Romans?
Have we done ought amiss? show us wherein,
And from the place where you behold us now,
The poor remainder of Andronici,
Will hand in hand all headlong cast us down,
And on the ragged stones beat forth our brains,
And make a mutual closure of our house:
Speak Romans speak, and if you say we shall,
Lo hand in hand, Lucius and I will fall.

Come come, thou reverent man of Rome,
And bring our Emperor gently in thy hand,
Lucius our Emperor: for well I know,
The common voice do cry it shall be so.

Lucius, all hail Romes Royal Emperor,
Go, go into old Titus sorrowful house,
And hither hale that misbelieuing Moore,
To be adiudg'd some direful slaughtering death,
As punishment for his most wicked life.
Lucius all hail to Romes gracious Governor.

Thanks gentle Romans, may I govern so,
To heal Romes harms, and wipe away her woe.
But gentle people, give me aim awhile,
For Nature puts me to a heavy task:
Stand all aloof, but Uncle draw you near,
To shed obsequious tears upon this Trunk:
Oh take this warm kiss on thy pale cold lips,
These forrowfull drops upon thy bloud-slaine face,
The last true Duties of thy Noble Son.

Tear for tear, and loving kiss for kiss,
Thy Brother Marcus tenders on thy Lips:
O were the sum of these that I should pay
Countlesse, and infinite, yet would I pay them.

Come hither Boy, come, come, and learn of us
To melt in showers: thy Grandsire loved thee well:
Many a time he danced thee on his knee:
Sung thee asleep, his Loving Breast, thy Pillow:
Many a matter has he told to thee,
Meet, and agreeing with thine Infancy:
In that respect then, like a loving Child,
Shed yet some small drops from thy tender Spring,
Because kind Nature does require it so:
Friends, should associate Friends, in Grief and Woe.
Bid him farewell, commit him to the Grave,
Do him that kindness, and take leave of him.

O Grandsire, Grandsire: even with all my heart
Would I were Dead, so you did Live again.
O Lord, I cannot speak to him for weeping,
My tears will choke me, if I open my mouth.

You sad Andronici, have done with woes,
Give sentence on this execrable Wretch,
That has been breeder of these dire events.

Set him breast deep in earth, and famish him:
There let him stand, and rave, and cry for food:
If any one releeues, or pitties him,
For the offense, he dies. This is our doom:
Some stay, to see him fast'ned in the earth.

O why should wrath be mute, and Fury dumb?
I am no Baby I, that with base Prayers
I should repent the Evils I have done.
Ten thousand worse, then ever yet I did,
Would I perform if I might have my will:
If one good Deed in all my life I did,
I do repent it from my very Soul.

Some loving Friends convey the Emp. hence,
And give him burial in his Fathers grave.
My Father, and Lauinia, shall forthwith
Be closed in our Households Monument:
As for that heinous Tiger Tamora,
No Funeral Rite, nor man in mournful Weeds:
No mournful Bell shall ring her Burial:
But throw her forth to Beasts and Birds of prey:
Her life was Beast-like, and deuoid of pity,
And being so, shall have like want of pity.
See Justice done on Aaron that damned Moore,
From whom, our heavy happes had their beginning:
Then afterward, to Order well the State,
That like Events, may never it Ruinate.


