IN Troy there lies the Scene From Isles of Greece
The Princes Orgillous, their high blood chafed
Have to the Port of Athens sent their ships
Fraught with the ministers and instruments
Of cruel War: Sixty and nine that wore
Their Crownets, Regal, from the Athenian bay
Put forth toward Phrygia, and their vow is made
To ransacke Troy, within whose strong emures
The ravished Helen, Menelaus Queen,
With wanton Paris sleeps, and that is the Quarrel.
To Tenedos they come,
And the deepe-drawing Bark do there disgorge
Their warlike frautage: now on Dardan Plains
The fresh and yet vnbruised Greeks do pitch
Their brave Pauillions. Priams six-gated City,
Dardan and Timbria, Helias, Chetas, Troien,
And Antenonidus with massy Staples
And corresponsiue and fulfilling Bolts
Stir up the Sons of Troy.
Now Expectation tickling skittish spirits,
On one and other side, Trojan and Greek,
Sets all on hazard* And hither am J come,
A Prologue armed, but not in confidence
Of Authors pen, or Actors voice; but suited
Jn like conditions, as our Argument;
To tell you (fair Beholders) that our Play
Leapes ore the vaunt and firstlings of those broils,
Beginning in the middle: starting thence away,
To what may be digested in a Play:
Like, or find fault, do as your pleasures are,
Now good, or bad, it is but the chance of War.
CAll here my Varlet, I Will unarm again.
Why should I war without the walls of Troy
That find such cruel battle here within?
Each Trojan that is master of his heart,
Let him to field, Troylus alas has none.

Will this geere nere be mended?


The Greeks are strong, and skilful to their strength,
Fierce to their skill, and to their fierceness Valiant:
But I am weaker then a woman's tear;
Tamer then sleep, fonder then ignorance;
Less valiant then the Virgin in the night,
And skillesse as vnpractis'd Infancy.

Well, I have told you enough of this: For my part, I Will not meddle nor make no
farther. He that will have a Cake out of the Wheat, must needs tarry the
grinding


Have I not tarried?


I the grinding; but you must tarry the bolting.


Have I not tarried?


I the boulting; but you must tarry the leau'ing.


Still have I tarried.


I, to the leauening: but heeres yet in the word hereafter, the Kneading, the
making of the Cake, the heating of the Oven, and the Baking; nay, you must stay
the cooling too, or you may chance to burn your lips


Patience her self, what Goddess ere she be,
Does lesser blench at sufferance, then I do:
At Priams Royal Table do I sit;
And when fair Cressid comes into my thoughts,
So (Traitor) then she comes, when she is thence.

Well:
She looked yesternight fairer, then ever I saw her look,
Or any woman else.

I was about to tell thee, when my heart,
As wedged with a sigh, would riue in twain,
Least Hector, or my Father should perceive me:
I have (as when the Sun does light a-scorne)
Buried this sigh, in wrinkle of a smile:
But sorrow, that is couched in seeming gladness,
Is like that mirth, Fate turns to sudden sadness.

And her hair were not somewhat darker then Helens, well go too, there were no
more comparison between the Women. But for my part she is my Kinswoman, I
would not (as they term it) praise it, but I would somebody had heard her
talk yesterday as I did: I will not dispraise your sister Cassandra's wit, but
--


Oh Pandarus! I tell thee Pandarus;
When I do tell thee, there my hopes lie drowned:
Reply not in how many Fadomes deep
They lie indrench'd. I tell thee, I am mad
In Cressids love. Thou answer'st she is Fair,
Powr'st in the open Ulcer of my heart,
Her Eyes, her Hair, her Cheek, her Gate, her Voice,
Handlest in thy discourse. O that her Hand
(In whose comparison, all whites are Ink)
Writing their own reproach; to whose soft seizure,
The Cignets Down is harsh, and spirit of Sense
Hard as the palm of Plough-man. This thou tel'st me;
As true thou tel'st me, when I say I love her:
But saying thus, instead of Oil and Balm,
Thou lai'st in every gash that love has given me,
The Knife that made it.

I speak no more then truth.


Thou do not speak so much.


Faith, I Will not meddle in it: Let her be as she is, if she be fair, it is the
better for her: and she be not, she has the mends in her own hands


Good Pandarus: How now Pandarus?


I have had my Labor for my travel, ill thought on of her, and ill thought on
of you: Gone between and between, but small thanks for my labor


What art thou angry Pandarus? what with me?


Because she is Kin to me, therefore she is not so fair as Helen, and she
were not kin to me, she would be as fair on Friday, as Helen is on Sunday. But
what care I? I care not and she were a Black-a-Moore, it is all one to me


Say I she is not fair?


I do not care whether you do or no. She Is a Fool to stay behind her
Father: Let her to the Greeks, and so I Will tell her the next time I see her: for
my part, I Will meddle nor make no more in the matter


Pandarus?


Not I.


Sweet Pandarus.


Pray you speak no more to me, I will leave all as I found it, and there an
end


Peace you ungracious Clamors, peace rude sounds,
Fools on both sides, Helen must needs be fair,
When with your blood you daily paint her thus.
I cannot fight upon this Argument:
It is too starved a subject for my Sword,
But Pandarus: O Gods! How do you plague me?
I cannot come to Cressid but by Pandar,
And he is as teachy to be wooed to woe,
As she is stubborn, chaste, against all suite.
Tell me Apollo for thy Daphnes Love
What Cressid is, what Pandar, and what we:
Her bed is India, there she lies, a Pearl*
Between our Ilium, and where she recides
Let it be called the wild and wandering flood,
Our self the Merchant, and this sailing Pandar,
Our doubtful hope, our conuoy and our Bark.

How now Prince Troylus?
Wherefore not a field?

Because not there; this woman's answer sorts.
For womanish it is to be from thence:
What news Aeneas from the field to day?

That Paris is returned home, and hurt.


By whom Aeneas?


Troylus by Menelaus.


Let Paris bleed, it is but a scar to scorn,
Paris is gored with Menelaus horn.

Hark what good sport is out of Town to day.


Better at home, if would I might were may:
But to the sport abroad, are you bound thither?

In all swift have.


Come go we then together.


Who were those went by?


Queen Hecuba, and Hellen.


And whether go they?


Up to the Eastern Tower,
Whose height commands as subject all the veil,
To see the battle: Hector whose patience,
Is as a Virtue fixed, to day was moved:
He chides Andromache and struck his Armorer,
And like as there were husbandry in War
Before the Sun rose, he was harnest lyte,
And to the field goe's he; where every flower
Did as a Prophet weep what it forsaw,
In Hectors wrath.

What was his cause of anger?


The noise goe's this;
There is among the Greeks,
A Lord of Trojan blood, Nephew to Hector,
They call him Ajax.

Good; and what of him?


They say he is a very man per se and stands alone.


So do all men, unless they are drunk, sick, or have no legs.


This man Lady, has robbed many beasts of their particular additions, he is as
valiant as the Lion, churlish as the Bear, slow as the Elephant: a man into
whom nature has so crowded humors, that his valor is crushed into folly, his
folly sauced with discretion: there is no man has a virtue, that he has not a
glimpse of, nor any man an attaint, but he carries some stain of it. He is
melancholy without cause, and merry against the hair, he has the joints of
every thing, but every thing so out of joint, that he is a gowtie Briareus,
many hands and no use; or purblinded Argus, all eyes and no sight


But how should this man that makes me smile, make Hector angry?


They say he yesterday cop'd Hector in the battle and stroke him down, the
disdaind and shame whereof, has ever since kept Hector fasting and waking


Who comes here?


Madam your Uncle Pandarus.


Hectors a gallant man.


As may be in the world Lady.


What Is that? what is that?


Good morrow Uncle Pandarus.


Good morrow Cozen Cressid: what do you talk of? good morrow Alexander: how do
you Cozen? when were you at Illium


This morning Uncle.


What were you talking of when I came? Was Hector armed and gone ere yea came to
Illium? Hellen was not up? was she


Hector was gone but Hellen was not up?


E'ene so; Hector was stirring early.


That were we talking of, and of his anger.


Was he angry?


So he says here.


True he was so; I know the cause too, heel lay about him to day I can tell
them that* and there is Troylus will not come far behind him, let them take
heed of Troylus; I can tell them that too


What is he angry too?


Who Troylus?
Troylus is the better man of the two.

Oh Jupiter; there is no comparison.


What not between Troylus and Hector? do you know a man if you see him?


I, if I ever saw him before and knew him.


Well I say Troylus is Troylus.


Then you say as I say,
For I am sure he is not Hector.

No not Hector is not Troylus in some degrees.


It Is just, to each of them he is himself.


Himself? alas poor Troylus I would he were.


So he is.


Condition I had gone bare-foote to India.


He is not Hector.


Himself? no? he is not himself, would a were himself: well, the Gods are
above, time must friend or end: well Troylus well, I would my heart were in her
body; no, Hector is not a better man then Troylus


Excuse me.


He is elder.


Pardon me, pardon me.


The others not come to it, you shall tell me another tale when the others come
to it: Hector shall not have his will this year


He shall not need it if he have his own.


Nor his qualities.


No matter.


Nor his beauty.


'Twould not become him, his own's better.


You have no judgment Niece; Hellen her self swore the other day, that
Troylus for a brown favor (for so it is I must confess) not brown neither


No, but brown.


Faith to say truth, brown and not brown.


To say the truth, true and not true.


She praised his complexion above Paris.


Why Paris has color enough.


So, he has.


Then Troylus should have too much, if she prasi'd him above, his complexion is
higher then his, he having color enough, and the other higher, is too flaming
a praise for a good complexion, I had as lieue Hellens golden tongue had
commended Troylus for a copper nose


I swear to you,
I think Hellen loves him better then Paris.

Then she is a merry Greek indeed.


Nay I am sure she does, she came to him the other day into the compast window,
and you know he has not past three or four hairs on his chinne


Indeed a Tapsters Arithmetique may soon bring his particulars therein, to a
total


Why he is very young, and yet will he within three pound lift as much as his
brother Hector


Is he is so young a man, and so old a lifter?


But to prove to you that Hellen loves him, she came and puts me her white
hand to his cloven chin


Juno have mercy, how came it cloven?


Why, you know it is dimpled,
I think his smyling becomes him better then any man in all Phrigia.

Oh he smiles valiantly.


Dooes he not?


Oh yes, and 'twere a clow'd in Autumn.


Why go to then, but to prove to you that Hellen loves Troylus.


Troylus will stand to thee
Proof, if you will prove it so.

Troylus? why he esteems her no more then I esteem an addle egg.


If you love an addle egg as well as you love an idle head, you would eat
chickens in the shell


I cannot choose but laugh to think how she tickled his chin, indeed she has a
maruel's white hand I must needs confess


Without the rack.


And she takes upon her to spy a white hair on his chinne.


Alas poor chin? many a wart is richer.


But there was such laughing, Queen Hecuba laughed that her eyes ran ore.


With Milstones.


And Cassandra laughed.


But there was more temperate fire under the pot of her eyes: did her eyes run
ore too


And Hector laughed.


At what was all this laughing?


Marry at the white hair that Hellen spied on Troylus chin.


And to had been a green hair, I should have laughed too.


They laughed not so much at the hair, as at his pretty answer.


What was his answer?


Quoth she, here is but two and fifty hairs on your chinne; and one of them
is white


This is her question.


That Is true, make no question of that, two and fifty hairs quoth he, and
one white, that white hair is my Father, and all the rest are his Sons.
Jupiter quoth she, which of these hairs is Paris my husband? The forked one
quoth he, plucked out and give it him: but there was such laughing, and Hellen
so blushed, and Paris so chaft, and all the rest so laughed, that it past


So let it now,
For is has been a great while going by.

Well Cozen,
I told you a thing yesterday, think on it.

So I does.


I Will be sworn it is true, he will weep you an'twere a man borne in April.


And I Will spring up in his tears, an'twere a nettle against May.


Hark they are coming from the field, shall we stand up here and see them, as
they pass toward Illium, good Niece do, sweet Niece Cressida


At your pleasure.


Here, here, here is an excellent place, here we may see most bravely, I Will
tell you them all by their names, as they pass by, but mark Troylus above the
rest


Speak not so lowed.


That Is Aeneas, is not that a brave man, he is one of the flowers of Troy I can
you, but merke Troylus, you shall see anon


Who Is that?


That Is Antenor, he has a shrowed wit I can tell you, and he is a man good
enough, he is one of th soundest judgment in Troy whosoever, and a proper man
of person: when comes Troylus? I Will show you Troylus anon, if he see me, you
shall see him him nod at me


Will he give you the nod?


You shall see.


If he do, the rich shall have, more.


That Is Hector, that, that, look you, that there is a fellow. Go thy way
Hector, there is a brave man Niece, O brave Hector! Look how he looks?
there is a countenance; is it not a brave man


O brave man!


Is a not? It dooes a man's heart good, look you what hacks are on his Helmet,
look you yonder, do you see? Look you there? There Is no jesting, laying on,
take it off, who ill as they say, there be hacks


Be those with Swords?


Swords, any thing he cares not, and the devil come to him, it is all one, by
Gods lid it dooes ones heart good. Yonder comes Paris, yonder comes Paris:
look ye yonder Niece, is it not a gallant man to, is it not? Why this is brave
now: who said he came hurt home to day? He Is not hurt, why this will do
Hellens heart good now, ha? Would I could see Troylus now, you shall Troylus
anon


Whose that?


That Is Hellenus, I marvel where Troylus is, that is Helenus, I think he went
not forth to day: that is Hellenus


Can Hellenus fight Uncle?


Hellenus no: yes heel fight indifferent, well, I marvel where Troylus is;
hark, do you not haere the people cry Troylus? Hellenus is a Priest


What sneaking fellow comes yonder?


Where? Yonder? That Is Daphobus. It Is Troylus! There Is a man Niece, hem* Brave
Troylus, the Prince of Chivalry


Peace, for shame peace.


Mark him, not him: O brave Troylus: look well upon him Niece, look you how
his Sword is bloudied, and his Helm more hackt then Hectors, and how he
looks, and how he goes. O admirable youth! he never saw three and twenty. Go
thy way Troylus, go thy way, had I a sister were a Grace, or a daughter a
Goddess, he should take his choice. O admirable man! Paris? Paris is dirt to
him, and I warrant, Helen to change, would give money to boot


Here come more.


Asses, fools, dolts, chafe and bran, chafe and bran; porredge after meat. I
could live and dye in the eyes of Troylus. Never look, never look; the Eagles
are gone, Crows and Dawes, Crows and Dawes: I had rather be such a man as
Troylus, then Agamemnon, and all Greece


There is among the Greeks Achilles, a better man then Troylus.


Achilles? a Dray-man, a Porter, a very Camel.


Well, well.


Well, well? Why have you any discretion? have you any eyes? Do you know what a
man is? Is not birth, beauty, good-shape, discourse, manhood, learning,
gentleness, virtue, youth, liberality, and so forth: the Spice, and salt that
seasons a man


I, a minced man, and then to be baked with no Date in the pie, for then the
man's dates out


You are such another woman, one knows not at what ward you lie.


Upon my back, to defend my belly; upon my wit, to defend my wiles; upon my
secrecy, to defend mine honesty; my Mask, to defend my beauty, and you to
defend all these: and at all these wards I lie at, at a thousand watches


Say one of your watches.


Nay I Will watch you for that, and that is one of the cheifest of them too: If I
cannot ward what I would not have hit, I can watch you for telling how I took
the blow, unless it swell past hiding, and then it is past watching


You are such another.


Sir, my Lord would instantly speak with you.


Where?


At your own house.


Good Boy tell him I come, I doubt he be hurt.
Fare ye well good Niece.

Adieu Uncle.


I Will be with you Niece by and by.


To bring Uncle.


I, a token from Troylus.


By the same token, you are a Bawd.
Words, vows, gifts, tears, and loves full sacrifice,
He offers in another enterprise:
But more in Troylus thousand fold I see,
Then in the glass of Pandar's praise may be;
Yet hold I off. Women are Angels wooing,
Things won are done, joys soul lies in the doing:
That she beloved, knows naught, that knows not this;
Men prize the thing vngain'd, more then it is.
That she was never yet, that ever knew
Love got so sweet, as when desire did sue:
Therefore this maxim out of love I teach;
"Atchieuement, is command; vngain'd, beseech.
That though my hearts Contents firm love does bear,
Nothing of that shall from mine eyes appear.

Princes:
What grief has set the Iaundies on your cheeks?
The ample proposition that hope makes
In all designs, begun on earth below
Fayles in the promised largeness: checkes and disasters
Grow in the veins of actions highest reared.
As knots by the conflux of meeting sap,
Infect the sound Pine, and diuerts his Grain
Tortiue and erant from his course of growth*
Nor Princes, is it matter new to us,
That we come short of our suppose so far,
That after seven years siege, yet Troy walls stand,
Since every action that has gone before,
Whereof we have Record, Trial did draw
Bias and thwart, not answering the aim:
And that unbodied figure of the thought
That gaue't surmised shape. Why then (you Princes)
Do you with cheeks abashed, behold our works,
And think them shame, which are (indeed) naught else
But the protractiue trials of great Jove,
To find persistiue constancy in men?
The finenesse of which Metal is not found
In Fortunes love: for then, the Bold and Coward,
The Wise and Fool, the Artist and vn-read,
The hard and soft, seem all affin'd, and kin.
But in the Wind and Tempest of her frown,
Distinction with a loud and powrefull fan,
Puffing at all, winnowes the light away;
And what has mass, or matter by it self,
Lies rich in Virtue, and unmingled.

With due Observance of thy godly seat,
Great Agamemnon, Nestor shall apply
Thy latest words.
In the reproof of Chance,
Lies the true proof of men: The Sea being smooth,
How many shallow bauble Boats dare sail
Upon her patient breast, making their way
With those of Nobler bulk?
But let the Ruffian Boreas once enrage
The gentle Thetis, and anon behold
The strong ribb'd Bark through liquid Mountains cut,
Bounding between the two moist Elements
Like Perseus Horse. Where Is then the saucy Boat,
Whose weak vntimber'd sides but even now
Co-riual'd Greatness? Either to harbor fled,
Or made a Toste for Neptune. Even so,
Does valors show, and valors worth divide
In storms of Fortune.
For, in her ray and brightness,
The Heard has more annoyance by the Brieze
Then by the Tiger: But, when the splitting wind
Makes flexible the knees of knotted Oaks,
And Flies fled under shade, why then
The thing of Courage,
As rowz'd with rage, with rage does sympathize,
And with an accent tuned in selfsame key,
Retyres to chiding Fortune.

Agamemnon.
Thou great Commander, Nerve, and Bone of Greece,
Heart of our Numbers, soul, and only spirit,
In whom the tempers, and the minds of all
Should be shut up: Hear what Ulysses speaks,
Besides the applause and approbation
The which most mighty for thy place and sway,
And thou most reverend for thy stretcht-out life,
I give to both your speeches: which were such,
As Agamemnon and the hand of Greece
Should hold up high in Brass: and such again
As venerable Nestor (hatched in Silver)
Should with a bond of air, strong as the Axletree
In which the Heavens ride, knit all Greeks ears
To his experienced tongue: yet let it please both
(Thou Great, and Wise) to hear Ulysses speak.

Speak Prince of Ithaca, and be it of less expect:
That matter needless of importlesse burden
Divide thy lips; then we are confident
When rank Thersites opes his Masticke jaws,
We shall hear Music, Wit, and Oracle.

Troy yet upon his basis had been down,
And the great Hectors sword had lacked a Master
But for these instances.
The specialty of Rule has been neglected;
And look how many Grecian Tents do stand
Hollow upon this Plain, so many hollow Factions.
When that the General is not like the Hiue,
To whom the Forragers shall all repair,
What Honey is expected? Degree being vizarded,
The unworthiest shows as fairly in the Mask.
The Heavens themselves, the Planets, and this Center,
Observe degree, priority, and place,
Insisture, course, proportion, season, form,
Office, and custom, in all line of Order:
And therefore is the glorious Planet Sol
In noble eminence, enthroned and sphear'd
Amid'st the other, whose med'cinable eye
Corrects the ill Aspects of Planets evil,
And posts like the Command'ment of a King,
Sans check, to good and bad. But when the Planets
In evil mixture to disorder wander,
What Plagues, and what portents, what mutiny?
What raging of the Sea? shaking of Earth?
Commotion in the Winds? Frights, changes, horrors,
Divert, and crack, rend and deracinate
The unity, and married calm of States
Quite from their fixure? O, when Degree is shak'd,
(Which is the Ladder to all high designs)
The enterprise is sick. How could Communities,
Degrees in Schools, and Brother-hoods in Cities,
Peaceful Commerce from diuidable shores,
The primogenitiue, and due of Birth,
Prerogative of Age, Crowns, Scepters, Laurels
(But by Degree) stand in Authentic place?
Take but Degree away, vn-tune that string,
And hark what Discord follows: each thing meets
In mere oppugnancie. The bounded Waters,
Should lift their bosoms higher then the Shores,
And make a soppe of all this solid Globe:
Strength should be Lord of imbecility,
And the rude Son should strike his Father dead:
Force should be right, or rather, right and wrong,
(Between whose endless jar, Justice recides)
Should loose her names, and so should Justice too.
Then every thing includes it self in Power,
Power into Will, Will into Appetite,
And Appetite (an universal Wolf,
So doubly seconded with Will, and Power)
Must make perforce an universal prey,
And last, eat up himself.
Great Agamemnon:
This Chaos, when Degree is suffocate,
Follows the choking:
And this neglection of Degree, is it
That by a pace goes backward in a purpose
It has to climb. The Generall's disdained
By him one step below; he, by the next,
That next, by him beneath: so every step
Exampled by the first pace that is sick
Of his Superior, grows to an envious Fever
Of pale, and bloodlesse Emulation.
And it is this Fever that keeps Troy on foot,
Not her own sinews. To end a tale of length,
Troy in our weakness lives, not in her strength.

Most wisely has Ulysses here discovered
The Fever, whereof all our power is sick.

The Nature of the sickness found (Ulysses)
What is the remedy?

The great Achilles, whom Opinion crowns,
The sinew, and the fore-hand of our Host,
Having his ear full of his ayery Fame,
Grows dainty of his worth, and in his Tent
Lies mocking our designs. With him, Patroclus,
Upon a lazy Bed, the liue-long day
Breaks scurrill Jests,
And with ridiculous and awkward action,
(Which Slanderer, he imitation call's)
He Pageants us. Sometime great Agamemnon,
Thy toplesse deputation he puts on;
And like a strutting Player, whose conceit
Lies in his Ham-string, and does think it rich
To hear the wooden Dialogue and sound
'Twixt his stretched footing, and the Scaffolage,
Such to be pitied, and ore-rested seeming
He acts thy Greatness in: and when he speaks,
It Is like a Chime a mending. With terms vnsquar'd,
Which from the tongue of roaring Typhon dropped,
Would seems Hyperboles. At this fusty stuff,
The large Achilles (on his prest-bed lolling)
From his deep Chest, laughes out a loud applause,
Cries excellent, it is Agamemnon just.
Now play me Nestor; hum, and stroke thy Beard
As he, being dressed to some Oration:
That Is done, as near as the extremest ends
Of paralels; as like, as Vulcan and his wife,
Yet god Achilles still cries excellent,
It Is Nestor right. Now play him (me) Patroclus,
Arming to answer in a night-Alarme,
And then (forsooth) the faint defects of Age
Must be the Scene of mirth, to cough, and spit,
And with a palsy fumbling on his Gorget,
Shake in and out the Riuet: and at this sport
Sir Valor dies; cries, O enough Patroclus,
Or, give me ribs of Steel, I shall split all
In pleasure of my Spleen. And in this fashion,
All our abilities, gifts, natures, shapes,
Seuerals and generals of grace exact,
Atchieuments, plots, orders, preuentions,
Excitements to the field, or speech for truce,
Success or loss, what is, or is not, serves
As stuff for these two, to make paradoxes.

And in the imitation of these twain,
Who (as Ulysses says) Opinion crowns
With an Imperial voice, many are infect:
Ajax is grown selfe-will'd, and bears his head
In such a reyne, in full as proud a place
As broad Achilles, and keeps his Tent like him;
Makes factious Feasts, railes on our state of War
Bold as an Oracle, and sets Thersites
A slave, whose Gall coins slanders like a Mint,
To match us in comparisons with dirt,
To weaken and discredit our exposure,
How rank soever rounded in with danger.

They tax our policy, and call it Cowardice,
Count Wisdom as no member of the War,
Fore-stall prescience, and esteem no act
But that of hand: The still and mental parts,
That do contriue how many hands shall strike
When fitness call them on, and know by measure
Of their obseruant toil, the Enemies weight,
Why this has not a singers dignity:
They call this Bed-worke, Mapp'ry, Closset-Warre:
So that the Ram that batters down the wall,
For the great swing and rudeness of his poize,
They place before his hand that made the Engine,
Or those that with the finenesse of their souls,
By Reason guide his execution.

Let this be granted, and Achilles horse
Makes many Thetis sons.

What Trumpet? Look Menelaus.


From Troy.


What would you before our Tent?


Is this great Agamemnons Tent, I pray you?


Even this.


May one that is a Herald, and a Prince,
Do a fair message to his Kingly ears?

With surety stronger then Achilles arm,
Before all the Greekish heads, which with one voice
Call Agamemnon Head and General.

Fair leave, and large security. How may
A stranger to those most Imperial looks,
Know them from eyes of other Mortals?

How?


I: I ask, that I might waken reverence,
And on the cheek be ready with a blush
Modest as morning, when she coldly eyes
The youthful Phoebus:
Which is that God in office guiding men?
Which is the high and mighty Agamemnon?

This Troyan scorns us, or the men of Troy
Are ceremonious Courtiers.

Courtiers as free, as debonnaire; unarmed,
As bending Angels: that is their Fame, in peace:
But when they would seem Soldiers, they have galls,
Good arms, strong joints, true swords, and Jove's accord,
Nothing so full of heart. But peace Aeneas,
Peace Troyan, lay thy finger on thy lips,
The worthiness of praise distaines his worth:
If that he praised himself, bring the praise forth.
But what the repining enemy commends,
That breath Fame blows, that praise sole pure transce^ds.

Sir, you of Troy, call you your self Aeneas?


I Greek, that is my name.


What Is your affayre I pray you?


Sir pardon, it is for Agamemnons cares*


He hears naught privately
That comes from Troy.

Nor I from Troy come not to whisper him,
I bring a Trumpet to awake his ear,
To set his sense on the attentive bent,
And then to speak.

Speak frankely as the wind.
It is not Agamemnons sleeping hour;
That thou shall know Troyan he is awake,
He tells thee so himself.

Trumpet blow loud,
Send thy Brass voice through all these lazy Tents,
And every Greek of mettle, let him know,
What Troy means fairly, shall be spoke alowd.
We have great Agamemnon here in Troy,
A Prince called Hector, Priam is his Father:
Who in this dull and long-continew'd Truce
Is rusty grown. He bad me take a Trumpet,
And to this purpose speak: Kings, Princes, Lords,
If there be one among'st the fayr'st of Greece,
That holds his Honor higher then his ease,
That seeks his praise, more then he fears his peril,
That knows his Valor, and knows not his fear,
That loves his Mistress more then in confession,
(With truant vows to her own lips he loves)
And dare a vow her Beauty, and her Worth,
In other arms then hers: to him this Challenge.
Hector, in view of Troyans, and of Greeks,
Shall make it good, or do his best to do it.
He has a Lady, wiser, fairer, truer,
Then ever Greek did compass in his arms,
And will to morrow with his Trumpet call,
Midway between your Tents, and walls of Troy,
To rowze a Grecian that is true in love.
If any come, Hector shall honor him:
If none, he will say in Troy when he retyres,
The Grecian Dames are sunburned, and not worth
The splinter of a Lance: Even so much.

This shall be told our Lovers Lord Aeneas,
If none of them have soul in such a kind,
We left them all at home: But we are Soldiers,
And may that Soldier a mere recreant prove,
That means not, has not, or is not in love:
If then one is, or has, or means to be,
That one meets Hector; if none else, I Will be he.

Tell him of Nestor, one that was a man
When Hectors Grandsire sucked: he is old now,
But if there be not in our Grecian mould,
One Noble man, that has one spark^ of fire
To answer for his Love; tell him from me,
I Will hide my Silver beard in a Gold Beauer,
And in my Vantbrace put this withered brawne,
And meeting him, will tell him, that my Lady
Was fayrer then his Grandame, and as chaste
As may be in the world: his youth in flood,
I Will pawn this truth with my three drops of blood.

Now heavens forbid such scarsitie of youth.


Amen.


Fair Lord Aeneas,
Let me touch your hand:
To our Pauillion shall I lead you first:
Achilles shall have word of this intent,
So shall each Lord of Greece from Tent to Tent:
Your self shall Feast with us before you go,
And find the welcome of a Noble Foe.

Nestor.


What says Ulysses?


I have a young conception in my brain,
Be you my time to bring it to some shape.

What is it?


This it is:
Blunt wedges riue hard knots: the seeded Pride
That has to this maturity blown up
In rank Achilles, must or now be cropped,
Or shedding breed a Nursery of like evil
To ouer-bulke us all.

Well, and how?


This challenge that the gallant Hector sends,
How ever it is spread in general name,
Relates in purpose only to Achilles.

The purpose is perspicuous even as substance,
Whose grossness little charracters sum up,
And in the publication make no strain,
But that Achilles, were his brain as barren
As banks of Lybia, though ( Apollo knows)
It Is dry enough, will with great speed of judgment,
I, with celerity, find Hectors purpose
Pointing on him.

And wake him to the answer, think you?


Yes, it is most meet; who may you else oppose
That can from Hector bring his Honor off,
If not Achilles; though it be a sportfull Combat,
Yet in this trial, much opinion dwells.
For here the Troyans taste our deer'st repute
With their fin'st Palate: and trust to me Ulysses,
Our imputation shall be oddely poised
In this wild action. For the success
(Although particular) shall give a scantling
Of good or bad, unto the General:
And in such Indexes, although small pricks
To their subsequent Volumes, there is seen
The baby figure of the Gyant-masse
Of things to come at large. It is supposed,
He that meets Hector, issues from our choice;
And choice being mutual act of all our souls,
Makes Merit her election, and does boil
As 'twere, from forth us all: a man distilled
Out of our Virtues; who miscarrying,
What heart from hence receyues the conquering part
To steel a strong opinion to themselves,
Which entertained, Limbs are in his instruments,
In no less working, then are Swords and Bows
Directive by the Limbs.

Give pardon to my speech:
Therefore it is meet, Achilles meet not Hector:
Let us (like Merchants) show our fowlest Wares,
And think perchance they will sell: If not,
The luster of the better yet to show,
Shall show the better. Do not consent,
That ever Hector and Achilles meet:
For both our Honor, and our Shame in this,
Are dogged with two strange Followers.

I see them not with my old eyes: what are they?


What glory our Achilles shares from Hector,
(Were he not proud) we all should wear with him:
But he already is too insolent,
And we were better parch in Affricke Sun,
Then in the pride and salt scorn of his eyes
Should he escape Hector fair. If he were foyld,
Why then we did our maine opinion crush
In taint of our best man. No, make a Lott'ry,
And by device let blockish Ajax draw
The sort to sight with Hector: Among our selves,
Give him allowance as the worthier man,
For that will physic the great Myrmidon
Who broils in loud applause, and make him fall
His Crest, that prouder then blew Iris bends.
If the dull brainlesse Ajax come safe off,
We Will dress him up in voices: if he fail,
Yet go we under our opinion still,
That we have better men. But hit or miss,
Our proiects life this shape of sense assumes,
Ajax employed, pluckes down Achilles Plumes.

Now Ulysses, I begin to relish thy advice,
And I will give a taste of it forthwith
To Agamemnon, go we to him straight:
Two Curres shall tame each other, Pride alone
Must tar the Mastiffes on, as 'twere their bone.

Thersites?


Agamemnon, how if he had Biles (full) all over generally.


Thersites?


And those Byles did run, say so; did not the General run, were not that a
botchy core


Dog.


Then there would come some matter from him:
I see none now.

Thou Bitch-Wolfes-Sonne, can you not hear?
Feel then.

The plague of Greece upon thee thou Mungrel beefe-witted Lord.


Speak then you whinid'st leaven speak, I will beat thee into handsomnesse.


I shall sooner rail thee into wit and holiness: but I think thy Horse will
sooner con an Oration, then you learn a prayer without book: Thou can strike,
can thou? A red Murren of th thy Iades tricks


Toads stool, learn me the Proclamation.


Do thou think I have no sense thou strik'st me thus?


The Proclamation.


Thou art proclaimed a fool, I think.


Do not Porpentine, do not; my fingers itch.


I would thou did itch from head to foot, and I had the scratching of thee, I
would make thee the lothsom'st scab in Greece


I say the Proclamation.


Thou grumblest and railest every hour on Achilles, and thou art as full of
envy at his greatness, as Cerberus is at Proserpina's beauty. I, that thou
barkst at him


Mistress Thersites.


Thou should strike him.


Coblofe.


He would pun thee into shiuers with his fist, as a Sailor breaks a biscuit.


You horson Curre.


Do, do.


Thou stool for a Witch.


I, do, do, thou sodden-witted Lord: thou have no more brain then I have in
mine elbows: An Asinico may tutor thee. Thou scuruy valiant Ass, thou art
here but to thresh Troyans, and thou art bought and sold among those of any
wit, like a Barbarian slave. If thou use to beat me, I will begin at thy heel
and tell what thou art by inches, thou thing of no bowels thou


You dog.


You scuruy Lord.


You Curre.


Mars his Idiot: do rudenes, do Camel, do, do.


Why how now Ajax? wherefore do you this?
How now Thersites? what is the matter man?

You see him there, do you?


I, what is the matter.


Nay look upon him.


So I do: what is the matter?


Nay but regard him well.


Well, why I do so.


But yet you look not well upon him: for who some ever you take him to be, he
is Ajax


I know that fool.


I, but that fool knows not himself.


Therefore I bear thee.


Lo, lo, lo, lo, what modicums of wit he vtters: his euasions have ears thus
long. I have bobb'd his Brain more then he has beat my bones: I will buy nine
Sparrowes for a penny, and his Piamater is not worth the ninth part of a
Sparrow. This Lord (Achilles) Ajax who wears his wit in his belly, and his
guts in his head, I Will tell you what I say of him


What?


I say this Ajax --


Nay good Ajax.


Has not so much wit.


Nay, I must hold you.


As will stop the eye of Helens Needle, for whom he comes to fight.


Peace fool.


I would have peace and quietness, but the fool will not: He there, that he,
look you there


O thou damned Curre, I shall --


Will you set your wit to a Fools.


No I warrant you, for a fools will shame it.


Good words Thersites.


What Is the quarrel?


I bad thee vile Owl, go learn me the tenure of the Proclamation, and he
rayles upon me


I serve thee not.


Well, go too, go too.


I serve here voluntary.


Your last service was sufferance, 'twas not voluntary, no man is beaten
voluntary: Ajax was here the voluntary* and you as under an Impresse


E'neso, a great deal of your wit too lies in your sinnewes, or else there be
Liars Hector shall have a great catch, if he knock out either of your brains,
he were as good crack a fustie nut with no kernel


What with me to Thersites?


There Is Ulysses, and old Nestor, whose Wit was moldy ere their Grandsires had
nails on their toes, yoke you like draft-Oxen, and make you plough up the war


What? what?


Yes good sooth, to Achilles, to Ajax, to --


I shall cut out your tongue.


It Is no matter, I shall speak as much as thou afterward.


No more words Thersites.


I will hold my peace when Achilles Brooch bids me, shall I?


There Is for you Patroclus.


I will see you hanged like Clotpoles ere I come any more to your Tents; I will
keep where there is wit stirring, and leave the faction of fools


A good riddance.


Marry this Sin is proclaimed through al our host,
That Hector by the sift hour of the Sun,
Will with a Trumpet, 'twixt our Tents and Troy
To morrow morning call some Knight to Arms,
That has a stomach* and such a one that dare
Maintain I know not what: it is trash. Farewell.

Farewell? who shall answer him?


I know not, it is put to Lottry: otherwise
He knew his man.

O meaning you, I will go learn more of it.


After so many hours, lives, speeches spent,
Thus once again says Nestor from the Greeks,
Deliver Helen, and all damage else
(As honor, loss of time, travail, expense,
Wounds, friends, and what else dear that is consumed
In hot digestion of this comorant War)
Shall be stroke off. Hector, what say you to it.

Though no man lesser fears the Greeks then I,
As far as touches my particular: yet dread Priam,
There is no Lady of more softer bowels,
More spungie, to suck in the sense of Fear,
More ready to cry out, who knows what follows
Then Hector is: the wound of peace is surety,
Surety secure: but modest Doubt is called
The Beacon of the wise: the tent that searches
To' the bottom of the worst. Let Helen go,
Since the first sword was drawn about this question,
Every tithe soul amongst many thousand dismes,
Has bin as dear as Helen: I mean of ours:
If we have lost so many tenths of ours
To guard a thing not ours, nor worth to us
(Had it our name) the value of one ten;
What merit's in that reason which denies
The yielding of her up.

Fie, fie, my Brother;
Weigh you the worth and honor of a King
(So great as our dread Father) in a Scale
Of common Ounces? Will you with Counters sum
The past proportion of his infinite,
And buckle in a waste most fathomlesse,
With spannes and inches so diminutiue,
As fears and reasons? Fie for godly shame?

No marvel though you bite so sharp at reasons,
You are so empty of them, should not our Father
Bear the great sway of his affairs with reasons,
Because your speech has none that tells him so.

You are for dreams and slumbers brother Priest
You furre your gloves with reason: here are your reasons
You know an enemy intends you harm,
You know, a sword employed is perilous,
And reason flies the object of all harm.
Who maruels then when Helenus beholds
A Grecian and his sword, if he do set
The very wings of reason to his heels:
Or like a Star disorb'd. Nay, if we talk of Reason,
And fly like chidden Mercury from Jove,
Let Us shut our gates and sleep: Manhood and Honor
Should have hard hearts, would they but fat their thoghts
With this crammed reason: reason and respect,
Makes Livers pale* and lustyhood deiect.

Brother, she is not worth
What she does cost the holding.

What Is aught, but as it is valew'd?


But value dwells not in particular will,
It holds his estimate and dignity
As well, wherein it is precious of it self,
As in the prizer: It Is made Idolatry,
To make the service greater then the God,
And the will dotes that is inclineable
To what infectiously it self affects,
Without some image of the affected merit.

I take to day a Wife, and my election
Is led on in the conduct of my Will;
My Will enkindled by mine eyes and ears,
Two traded Pylots 'twixt the dangerous shores
Of Will, and Judgment. How may I avoid
(Although my will distaste what it elected)
The Wife I chose, there can be no evasion
To blench from this, and to stand firm by honor.
We turn not back the Silks upon the Merchant
When we have spoiled them; nor the remainder Viands
We do not throw in vnrespectiue same,
Because we now are full. It was thought meet
Paris should do some vengeance on the Greeks;
Your breath of full consent bellied his Sails,
The Seas and Winds (old Wranglers) took a Truce,
And did him service; he touched the Ports desired,
And for an old Aunt whom the Greeks held Captive,
He brought a Grecian Queen, whose youth and freshness
Wrinkles Apolloes, and makes stale the morning.
Why keep we her? the Grecians keep our Aunt:
Is she worth keeping? Why she is a Pearl,
Whose price has launched above a thousand Ships,
And turned Crowned Kings to Merchants.
If you will avouch, 'twas wisdom Paris went,
(As you must needs, for you all cride, Go, go:)
If you will confess, he brought home Noble prize,
(As you must needs) for you all clapped your hands,
And cride inestimable; why do you now
The issue of your proper Wisdoms rate,
And do a deed that Fortune never did?
Beggar the estimation which you prized,
Richer then Sea and Land? O Theft most base!
That we have stolen what we do fear to keep.
But Thieves unworthy of a thing so stolen,
That in their Country did them that disgrace,
We fear to warrant in our Native place.

Cry Troyans, cry.


What noise? what shreeke is this?


It Is our mad sister, I do know her voice.


Cry Troyans.


It is Cassandra.


Cry Troyans cry; lend me ten thousand eyes,
And I will fill them with Propheticke tears.

Peace sister, peace.


Virgins, and Boys; mid-age and wrinkled old,
Soft infancy, that nothing can but cry,
Add to my clamor: let us pay betimes
A moity of that mass of moan to come.
Cry Troyans cry, practice your eyes with tears,
Troy must not be, nor goodly Illion stand,
Our firebrand Brother Paris burns us all.
Cry Troyans cry, a Helen and a woe;
Cry, cry, Troy burns, or else let Helen go.

Now youthful Troylus, do not these hie strains
Of divination in our Sister, work
Some touches of remorse? Or is your blood
So madly hot, that no discourse of reason,
Nor fear of bad success in a bad cause,
Can qualify the same?

Why Brother Hector,
We may not think the justness of each act
Such, and no other then event does form it,
Not once deiect the courage of our minds;
Because Cassandra's mad, her brainsicke raptures
Cannot distaste the goodness of a quarrel,
Which has our several Honors all engaged
To make it gracious. For my private part,
I am no more touched, then all Priams sons,
And love forbid there should be done among'st us
Such things as might offend the weakest spleen,
To fight for, and maintain.

Else might the world convince of leuitie,
As well my vnder-takings as your counsels:
But I attest the gods, your full consent
Gave wings to my propension, and cut off
All fears attending on so dire a project.
For what (alas) can these my single arms?
What propugnation is in one man's valor
To stand the push and enmity of those
This quarrel would excite? Yet I protest,
Were I alone to pass the difficulties,
And had as ample power, as I have will,
Paris should never retract what he has done,
Nor faint in the pursuit.

Paris, you speak
Like one be-sotted on your sweet delights;
You have the Honey still, but these the Gall,
So to be valiant, is no praise at all.

Sir, I propose not merely to my self,
The pleasures such a beauty brings with it:
But I would have the soil of her fair Rape
Wiped off in honorable keeping her.
What Treason were it to the ransacked Queen,
Disgrace to your great worths, and shame to me,
Now to deliver her possession up
On terms of base compulsion? Can it be,
That so degenerate a strain as this,
Should once set footing in your generous bosoms?
There Is not the meanest spirit on our party,
Without a heart to dare, or sword to draw,
When Helen is defended: nor none so Noble,
Whose life were ill bestowed, or death vnfam'd,
Where Helen is the subject. Then (I say)
Well may we fight for her, whom we know well,
The worlds large spaces cannot parallel.

Paris and Troylus, you have both said well:
And on the cause and question now in hand,
Have gloz'd, but superficially; not much
Unlike young men, whom Aristotle thought
Unfit to hear Moral Philosophy.
The Reasons you allege* do more conduce
To the hot passion of distemp'red blood,
Then to make up a free determination
'Twixt right and wrong: For pleasure, and revenge,
Have ears more deaf then Adders, to the voice
Of any true decision. Nature craves
All dues be rendered to their Owners: now
What nearer debt in all humanity,
Then Wife is to the Husband? If this law
Of Nature be corrupted through affection,
And that great minds of partial indulgence,
To their benumbed wills resist the same,
There is a Law in each well-ordred Nation,
To curb those raging appetites that are
Most disobedient and refracturie.
If Helen then be wife to Sparta's King
(As it is known she is) these Moral Laws
Of Nature, and of Nation, speak alowd
To have her back returned. Thus to persist
In doing wrong, extenuates not wrong,
But makes it much more heavy. Hectors opinion
Is this in way of truth: yet nere the less,
My spritely brethren, I propend to you
In resolution to keep Helen still;
For it is a cause that has no mean dependence,
Upon our joint and several dignities.

Why? there you touched the life of our design:
Were it not glory that we more affected,
Then the performance of our heauing spleenes,
I would not wish a drop of Trojan blood,
Spent more in her defense. But worthy Hector,
She is a theme of honor and renown,
A spur to valiant and magnanimous deeds,
Whose present courage may beat down our foes,
And fame in time to come canonize us.
For I presume brave Hector would not loose
So rich advantage of a promised glory,
As smiles upon the forehead of this action,
For the wide worlds reuenew.

I am yours,
You valiant offspring of great Priamus,
I have a roisting challenge sent among'st
The dull and factious nobles of the Greeks,
Will strike amazement to their drowsy spirits,
I was aduertiz'd, their Great general slept,
Whilst emulation in the army crept:
This I presume will wake him.

How now Thersites? what lost in the Labyrinth of thy fury? shall the Elephant
Ajax carry it thus? he beats me, and I rail at him: O worthy satisfaction,
would it were otherwise: that I could beat him, whilst he railed at me:
Sfoote, I Will learn to conjure and raise Devils, but I Will see some issue of my
spiteful execrations. Then there is Achilles, a rare Enginer. If Troy be not
taken till these two undermine it, the walls will stand till they fall of
themselves. O thou great thunder-darter of Olympus, forget that thou art Jove
the King of gods: and Mercury, loose all the Serpentine craft of thy Caduceus,
if thou take not that little little less then little wit from them that they
have, which short-arm'd ignorance it self knows, is so abundant scarce, it
will not in circumuention deliver a Fly from a Spider, without drawing the
massy Irons and cutting the web: after this, the vengeance on the whole Camp,
or rather the bone-ach, for that me thinks is the curse dependant on those
that war for a placket. I have said my prayers and devil, envy, say Amen:
What ho? my Lord Achilles

Who Is there? Thersites. Good Thersites come in and rail.


If I could have remembered a guilt counterfeit, thou would not have slipped
out of my contemplation, but it is no matter, thy self upon thy self. The
common curse of mankind, folly and ignorance be thine in great reuenew;
heaven bless thee from a Tutor, and Discipline come not near thee. Let thy
blood be thy direction till thy death, then if she that lays thee out says
thou art a fair coarse, I Will be sworn and sworn upon it she never shrouded any
but Lazars, Amen. Where Is Achilles


What art thou devout? wast thou in a prayer?


I, the heavens hear me.


Who Is there?


Thersites, my Lord.


Where, where, art thou come? why my cheese, my digestion, why have thou not
served thy self into my Table, so many meals? Come, what is Agamemnon


Thy Commander Achilles, then tell me Patroclus, what is Achilles?


Thy Lord Thersites: then tell me I pray thee, what is thy self?


Thy knower Patroclus: then tell me Patroclus, what art thou?


Thou may tell that know.


O tell, tell.


I Will declin the whole question: Agamemnon commands Achilles, Achilles is my
Lord, I am Patroclus knower, and Patroclus is a fool


You rascal.


Peace fool, I have not done.


He is a priuiledg'd man, proceed Thersites.


Agamemnon is a fool, Achilles is a fool, Thersites is a fool, and as
aforesaid, Patroclus is a fool


Derive this? come?


Agamemnon is a fool to offer to command Achilles, Achilles is a fool to be
commanded of Agamemon, Thersites is a fool to serve such a fool: and
Patroclus is a fool positive


Why am I a fool?


Make that demand to the Creator, it suffises me thou art. Look you, who comes
here


Patroclus, I Will speak with no body: come in with me Thersites.


Here is such patcherie, such iugling, and such knauerie: all the argument is a
Cuckold and a Whore, a good quarrel to draw emulations, factions, and bleed to
death upon: Now the dry Suppeago on the Subject, and War and Lechery
confound all


Where is Achilles?


Within his Tent, but ill disposed my Lord.


Let it be known to him that we are here:
He sent out Messengers, and we lay by
Our appertainments, visiting of him:
Let him be told of, so perchance he think
We dare not move the question of our place,
Or know not what we are.

I shall so say to him.


We saw him at the opening of his Tent,
He is not sick.

Yes, Lion sick, sick of proud heart; you may call it Melancholy if will
favor the man, but by my head, it is pride; but why, why, let him show us the
cause? A word my Lord


What moves Ajax thus to bay at him?


Achillis has inueigled his Fool from him.


Who, Thersites?


He.


Then will Ajax lack matter, if he have lost his Argument.


No, you see he is his argument that has his argument Achilles.


All the better, their fraction is more our wish then their faction; but it was
a strong counsel that a Fool could disunite


The amity that wisdom knits, not folly may easily untie.

Here comes Patroclus.

No Achilles with him?


The Elephant has joints, but none for courtesy:
His leg are legs for necessity, not for slight.

Achilles bids me say he is much sorry:
If any thing more then your sport and pleasure,
Did move your greatness, and this noble State,
To call upon him; he hopes it is no other,
But for your health, and your digestion sake;
An after Dinners breath.

Hear you Patroclus:
We are too well acquainted with these answers:
But his evasion winged thus swift with scorn,
Cannot outflye our apprehensions.
Much attribute he has, and much the reason,
Why we ascribe it to him, yet all his virtues,
Not virtuously of his own part beheld,
Do in our eyes, begin to loose their gloss;
Yea, and like fair Fruit in an vnholdsome dish,
Are like to rot untasted: go and tell him,
We came to speak with him; and you shall not sin,
If you do say, we think him over proud,
And under honest; in selfe-assumption greater
Then in the note of judgment: and worthier then himself
Here tends the savage strangeness he puts on,
Disguise the holy strength of their command:
And under write in an observing kind
His humorous predominance, yea watch
His pettish lines, his ebs, his flows, as if
The passage and whole carriage of this action
Rode on his tide. Go tell him this, and add,
That if he ouerhold his price so much,
We Will none of him; but let him, like an Engine
Not portable, lie under this report.
Bring action hither, this cannot go to war:
A stirring Dwarf, we do allowance give,
Before a sleeping Giant: tell him so.

I shall, and bring his answer presently.


In second voice we will not be satisfied,
We come to speak with him, Ulysses enter you.

What is he more then another?


No more then what he thinks he is.


Is he so much, do you not think, he thinks himself a better man then I am?


No question.


Will you subscribe his thought, and say he is?


No, Noble Ajax, you are as strong, as valiant, as wise, no less noble, much
more gentle, and altogether more tractabl


Why should a man be proud? How does pride grow? I know not what it is.


Your mind is the cleerer Ajax, and your virtues the fairer; he that is proud,
eats up himself; Pride is his own Glass, his own trumpet, his own
Chronicle, and what ever praises it self but in the deed, deuoures the deed
in the praise


I do hate a proud man, as I hate the ingendring of Toades.


Yet ^e ^oues himself: Is It not strange?


Achilles will not to the field to morrow.


What Is his excuse?


He does rely on none,
But carries on the stream of his dispose,
Without observance or respect of any,
In will peculiar, and in self admission.

Why, will he not upon our fair request,
Vntent his person, and share the air with us?

Things small as nothing, for requests sake only
He makes important; possessed he is with greatness,
And speaks not to himself, but with a pride
That quarrels at selfe-breath. Imagined wroth
Holds in his blood such swollen and hot discourse,
That twixt his mental and his active parts,
Kingdom'd Achilles in commotion rages,
And batters against it self; what should I say?
He is so plaguey proud, that the death tokens of it,
Cry no recovery.

Let Ajax go to him.
Dear Lord, go you and greet him in his Tent;
It Is said he holds you well, and will be led
At your request a little from himself.

O Agamemnon, let it not be so.
We Will consecrate the steps that Ajax makes,
When they go from Achilles; shall the proud Lord,
That bastes his arrogance with his own seame,
And never suffers matter of the world,
Enter his thoughts: save such as do reuolue
And ruminate himself. Shall he be worshipped,
Of that we hold an Idol, more then he?
No, this thrice worthy and right valiant Lord,
Must not so staule his Palm, nobly acquired,
Nor by my will assubingate his merit,
As amply titled as Achilles is: by going to Achilles,
That were to enlard his fat already, pride,
And add more Coals to Cancer, when he burns
With entertaining great Hiperion.
This L. go to him? Jupiter forbid,
And say in thunder, Achilles go to him.

O this is well, he rubs the vein of him.


And how his silence drinks up this applause.


If I go to him, with my armed fist, I Will pash him ore the face.


O no, you shall not go.


And a be proud with me, i will phese his pride: let me go to him.


Not for the worth that hangs upon our quarrel.


A paultry insolent fellow.


How he describes himself.


Can he not be sociable?


The Raven chides blackness.


I Will let his humors blood.


He will be the Physician that should be the patient.


And all men were a my mind.


Wit would be out of fashion.


A should not bear it so, a should eat Swords first: shall pride carry it?


And 'twould, you would carry half.


A would have ten shares.


I will knede him, I Will make him supple, he is not yet through warm.


Force him with praises, pour in, pour in: his ambition is dry.


My L. you feed too much on this dislike.


Our noble General, do not do so.


You must prepare to fight without Achilles.


Why, it is this naming of him does him harm.
Here is a man, but it is before his face,
I will be silent.

Wherefore should you so?
He is not emulous, as Achilles is.

'Know the whole world, he is as valiant.


A horson dog, that shall palter thus with us, would he were a Trojan.


What a vice were it in Ajax now --


If he were proud.


Or covetous of praise.


I, or surley borne.


Or strange, or self affected.


Thank the heavens L. thou art of sweet composure;
Praise him that got thee, she that gave thee suck:
Fame by thy Tutor, and thy parts of nature
Thrice famed beyond, beyond all erudition;
But he that disciplined thy arms to fight,
Let Mars divide Eternity in twain,
And give him half, and for thy vigor,
Bull-bearing Milo: his addition yield
To sinnowie Ajax: I will not praise thy wisdom,
Which like a bourne, a pale, a shore confines
Thy spacious and dilated parts; here is Nestor
Instructed by the Antiquary times:
He must, he is, he cannot but be wise.
But pardon Father Nestor, were your days
As green as Ajax, and your brain so tempered,
You should not have the eminence of him,
But be as Ajax.

Shall I call you Father?


I my good Son.


Be ruled by him Lord Ajax.


There is no tarrying here, the Heart Achilles
Keeps thicker: please it our General,
To call together all his state of war,
Fresh Kings are come to Troy; to morrow
We must with all our maine of power stand fast:
And here is a Lord, come Knights from East to West,
And cull their flower, Ajax shall cope the best.

Go we to Counsel, let Achilles sleep;
Light Botes may sail swift, though greater bulkes draw deep.

Friend, you, pray you a word: Do not you follow the young Lord Paris?


I sir, when he goes before me.


You depend upon him I mean?


Sir, I do depend upon the Lord.


You depend upon a noble Gentleman: I must needs praise him.


The Lord be praised.


You know me, do you not?


Faith sir, superficially.


Friend know me better, I am the Lord Pandarus.


I hope I shall know your honor better.


I do desire it.


You are in the state of Grace?


Grace, not so friend, honor and Lordship are my title: What Music is this?


I do but partly know sir: it is Music in parts.


Know you the Musicians.


Wholly sir.


Who play they to?


To the hearers sir.


At whose pleasure friend?


At mine sir, and theirs that love Music.


Command, I mean friend.


Who shall I command sir?


Friend, we understand not one another: I am too courtly, and thou art too
cunning. At whose request do these men play


That Is to it indeed sir: marry sir, at the request of Paris my L. who is there
in person; with him the mortal Venus, the heart blood of beauty, loves
invisible soul


Who? my Cousin Cressida.


No sir, Helen, could you not find out that by her attributes?


It should seem fellow, that thou have not seen the Lady Cressida. I come to
speak with Paris from the Prince Troylus: I will make a complementall assault
upon him, for my business seethes


Sodden business, there is a stewed phrase indeed.


Fair be to you my Lord, and to all this fair company: fair desires in all
fair measure fairly guide them, especially to you fair Queen, fair
thoughts be your fair pillow


Dear L. you are full of fair words.


You speak your fair pleasure sweet Queen: fair Prince, here is good
broken Music


You have broke it cozen: and by my life you shall make it whole again, you
shall piece it out with a piece of your performance. Nel, he is full of harmony


Truly Lady no.


O sir.


Rude in sooth, in good sooth very rude.


Well said my Lord: well, you say so in fits.


I have business to my Lord, dear Queen: my Lord will you vouchsafe me a
word


Nay, this shall not hedge us out, we will hear you sing certainly.


Well, sweet Queen you are pleasant with me, but, marry thus my Lord, my
dear Lord, and most esteemed friend your brother Troylus


My Lord Pandarus, honey sweet Lord.


Go too sweet Queen, go to.
Commends himself most affectionately to you.

You shall not bob us out of our melody:
If you do, our melancholy upon your head.

Sweet Queen, sweet Queen, that is a sweet Queen I faith --


And to make a sweet Lady sad, is a sower offense.


Nay, that shall not serve your turn, that shall it not in truth la. Nay, I
care not for such words, no, no. And my Lord he desires you, that if the King
call for him at Supper, you will make his excuse


My Lord Pandarus?


What says my sweet Queen, my very, very sweet Queen?


What exploit's in hand, where sups he to night?


Nay but my Lord?


What says my sweere Queen? my cozen will fall out with you.


You must not know where he sups.


With my disposer Cressida.


No, no; no such matter, you are wide, come your disposer is sick.


Well, I Will make excuse.


I good my Lord: why should you say Cressida? no, your poor disposer's sick.


I spy.


You spy, what do you spy: come, give me an
Instrument now sweet Queen.

Why this is kindly done?


My Niece is horrible in love with a thing you have sweet Queen.


She shall have it my Lord, if it be not my Lord Paris.


He? no, she will none of him, they two are twain.


Falling in after falling out, may make them three.


Come, come, I Will hear no more of this, I Will sing you a song now.


I, I, prithee now: by my troth sweet Lord thou have a fine forehead.


I you may, you may.


Let thy song be love: this love will undo us al.
Oh Cupid Cupid* Cupid.

Love? I that it shall in faith.


I, good now love, love, no thing but love.


In good troth it begins so.

Love, love, nothing but love, still more:
For O loves Bow,
Shootes Bucke and Do:
The Shaft confounds not that it wounds,
But tickles still the sore:
These Lovers cry, oh ho they dye;
Yet that which seems the wound to kill,
Does turn oh ho, to ha ha he:
So dying love lives still,
O ho a while, but ha ha ha,
O ho groans out for ha ha ha -- hey ho.

In love in faith to the very tip of the nose.


He eats nothing but doves love, and that breeds hot blood, and hot blood
begets hot thoughts, and hot thoughts beget hot deeds, and hot deeds is love


Is this the generation of love? Hot blood, hot thoughts, and hot deeds, why
they are Vipers, is Love a generation of Vipers

Sweet Lord whose a field to day?


Hector, Deiphoebus, Helenus, Anthenor, and all the gallantry of Troy. I would
feign have armed to day, but my Nell would not have it so

How chance my brother Troylus went not?


He hangs the lip at something; you know all Lord Pandarus?


Not I honey sweet Queen: I long to hear how they sped to day:
You Will remember your brothers excuse?

To a hair.


Farewell sweet Queen.


Commend me to your Niece.


I will sweet Queen.


They Are come from field: let us to Priams Hall
To greet the Warriors. Sweet Hellen, I must woe you,
To help unarm our Hector: his stubborn Buckles,
With these your white enchanting fingers touched,
Shall more obey then to the edge of Steel,
Or force of Greekish sinews: you shall do more
Then all the Island Kings, disarme great Hector.

'Twill make us proud to be his servant Paris:
Yea what he shall receive of us in duty,
Gives us more palm in beauty then we have:
Yea ouershines our self.
Sweet above thought I love thee.

How now, where is thy Master, at my Cousen Cressidas?


No sir, he stays for you to conduct him thither.


O here he comes: How now, how now?


Sir walk off.


Have you seen my Cousin?


No Pandarus: I stalk about her door
Like a strange soul upon the Stigian banks
Staying for waftage. O be thou my Charon,
And give me swift transportance to those fields,
Where I may wallow in the Lilly beds
Proposed for the deseruer. O gentle Pandarus,
From Cupids shoulder pluck his painted wings,
And fly with me to Cressid.

Walk here in the Orchard, I Will bring her straight.


I am giddy; expectation whirles me round,
The imaginary relish is so sweet,
That it inchants my sense: what will it be
When that the watery pallats taste indeed
Loves thrice reputed Nectar? Death I fear me
Sounding destruction, or some joy too fine,
Too subtle, potent, and too sharp in sweetness,
For the capacity of my ruder powers;
I fear it much, and I do fear besides,
That I shall loose distinction in my joys,
As does a battle, when they charge on heaps
The enemy flying.

She Is making her ready, she will come straight; you must be witty now, she does
so blush, and fetches her wind so short, as if she were fraid with a sprite:
I Will fetch her; it is the prettiest villain, she fetches her breath so short as
a new taken Sparrow


Even such a passion does embrace my bosom:
My heart beats thicker then a feauorous pulse,
And all my powers do their bestowing loose,
Like vass^lage at unawares encountering
The eye of Majesty.

Come, come, what need you blush?

Shames a babie; here she is now, swear the oaths now to her, that you have
sworn to me. What are you gone again, you must be watched ere you be made
tame, must you? come your ways, come your ways, and you draw backward we will
put you in th fills: why do you not speak to her? Come draw this curtain, and
let us see your picture. Alas the day, how loath you are to offend day light?
and 'twere dark you would close sooner: So, so* rub on, and kiss the mistress;
how now, a kiss in fee-farme? build there Carpenter, the air is sweet. Nay,
you shall fight your hearts out ere I part you. The Faulcon, as the Tercell,
for all the Ducks ith River: go too* go too


You have bereft me of all words Lady.


Words pay no debts; give her deeds: but she will bereave you 'oth' deeds too,
if she call your actiuity in question: what billing again? here is in witness
whereof the Parties interchangeably. Come in, come in, I Will go get a fire


Will you walk in my Lord?


O Cressida, how often have I wished me thus?


Wished my Lord? the gods grant? O my Lord.


What should they grant? what makes this pretty abruption: what too curious
dreg espies my sweet Lady in the fountain of our love


More dregs then water, if my ears have eyes.


Fears make devils of Cherubins, they never see truly.


Blind fear, that seeing reason leads, finds safe footing, then blind
reason, stumbling without fear: to fear the worst, often cures the worse


Oh let my Lady apprehend no fear,
In all Cupids Pageant there is presented no monster.

Not nothing monstrous neither?


Nothing but our undertakings, when we vow to weep seas, live in fire, eat
rocks, tame Tigers; thinking it harder for our Mistress to devise imposition
enough, then for us to undergo any difficulty imposed. This is the
monstruositie in love Lady, that the will is infinite, and the execution
confined; that the desire is boundless, and the act a slave to limit


They say all Lovers swear more performance then they are able, and yet
reserve an ability that they never perform: vowing more then the perfection of
ten; and discharging less then the tenth part of one. They that have the voice
of Lions, and the act of Hares: are they not Monsters


Are there such? such are not we: Praise us as we are tasted, allow us as we
prove: our head shall go bare till merit crown it: no perfection in reuersion
shall have a praise in present: we will not name desert before his birth, and
being borne his addition shall be humble: few words to fair faith. Troylus
shall be such to Cressid, as what envy can say worst, shall be a mock for his
truth; and what truth can speak truest, not truer then Troylus


Will you walk in my Lord?


What blushing still? have you not done talking yet?


Well Uncle, what folly I commit, I dedicate to you.


I thank you for that: if my Lord get a Boy of you, you will give him me: be true
to my Lord, if he flinch, chide me for it


You know now your hostages: your Uncles word and my firm faith.


Nay, I Will give my word for her too: our kindred though they be long ere they
are wooed, they are constant being won: they are Burres I can tell you,
they will stick where they are thrown


Boldness comes to me now, and brings me heart: Prince Troylus, I have loved
you night and day, for many weary months


Why was my Cressid then so hard to win?


Hard to seem won: but I was won my Lord
With the first glance; that ever pardon me,
If I confess much you will play the tyrant:
I love you now, but not till now so much
But I might master it; in faith I lie:
My thoughts were like unbridled children grow
Too headstrong for their mother: see we fools,
Why have I blab'd: who shall be true to us
When we are so vnsecret to our selves?
But though I loved you well, I woed you not,
And yet good faith I wished my self a man;
Or that we women had men's privilege
Of speaking first. Sweet, bid me hold my tongue,
For in this rapture I shall surely speak
The thing I shall repent: see, see, your silence
Coming in dumbness, from my weakness draws
My soul of counsel from me. Stop my mouth.

And shall, albeit sweet Music issues thence.


Pretty in faith.


My Lord, I do beseech you pardon me,
'Twas not my purpose thus to beg a kiss:
I am ashamed; O Heavens, what have I done!
For this time will I take my leave my Lord.

Your leave sweet Cressid?


Leave: and you take leave till to morrow morning.


Pray you content you.


What offends you Lady?


Sir, mine own company.


You cannot shun your self.


Let me go and try:
I have a kind of self recides with you:
But an unkind self, that it self will leave,
To be another fool. Where is my wit?
I would be gone: I speak I know not what.

Well know they what they speak, that speaks so wisely.


Perchance my Lord, I show more craft then love,
And fell so roundly to a large confession,
To Angle for your thoughts: but you are wise,
Or else you love not: for to be wise and love,
Exceedes man's might, that dwells with gods above.

O that I thought it could be in a woman:
As if it can, I will presume in you,
To feed for aye her lamp and flames of love.
To keep her constancy in plight and youth,
Out-liuing beauties outward, with a mind
That does renew swifter then blood decaies:
Or that persuasion could but thus convince me,
That my integrity and truth to you,
Might be affronted with the match and weight
Of such a winnowed puriritie in love:
How were I then vp-lifted! but alas,
I am as true, as truths simplicity,
And simpler then the infancy of truth.

In that I Will war with you.


O virtuous fight,
When right with right wars who shall be most right:
True swains in love, shall in the world to come
Approve their truths by Troylus, when their rimes,
Full of protest, of oath and big compare;
Wants similes, truth tired with iteration,
As true as steel, as plantage to the Moon:
As Sun to day: as Turtle to her mate:
As Iron to Adamant: as Earth to the Center:
Yet after all comparisons of truth,
(As truths authenticke author to be cited)
As true as Troylus, shall crown up the Verse,
And sanctify the numbers.

Prophet may you be:
If I be false, or swerue a hair from truth,
When time is old and has forgot it self:
When water drops have worn the Stones of Troy;
And blind oblivion swallowed Cities up;
And mighty States characterlesse are grated
To dustie nothing; yet let memory,
From false to false, among false Maids in love,
Vpbraid my falsehood, when they'aue said as false,
As Air, as Water, as Wind, as sandy earth;
As Fox to Lamb; as Wolf to Heifers Calfe;
Pard to the Hind, or Stepdame to her Son;
Yea, let them say, to stick the heart of falsehood,
As false as Cressid.

Go too, a bargain made: seal it, seal it, I Will be the witness here I hold
your hand: here my Cousins, fever you prove false one to another, since I have
taken such pains to bring you together, let all pitiful goers between be
called to the worlds end after my name: call them all Panders; let all constant
men be Troylusses, all false women Cressids, and all brokers between, Panders:
say, Amen


Amen.


Amen.


Amen.

Whereupon I will show you a Chamber, which bed, because it shall not speak of
your pretty encounters, press it to death: away

And Cupid grant all tong-tide Maidens here,
Bed, Chamber, and Pander, to provide this geere.

Now Princes for the service I have done you,
The advantage of the time promps me aloud,
To call for recompense: appear it to your mind,
That through the sight I bear in things to love,
I have abandoned Troy, left my possession,
Incurred a Traitors name, exposed my self,
From certain and possessed conueniences,
To doubtful fortunes, sequestring from me all
That time, acquaintance, custom and condition,
Made tame, and most familiar to my nature:
And here to do you service am become,
As new into the world, strange, unacquainted.
I do beseech you, as in way of taste,
To give me now a little benefit:
Out of those many registered in promise,
Which you say, live to come in my behalf.

What would thou of us Trojan? make demand?


You have a Trojan prisoner, called Anthenor,
Yesterday took: Troy holds him very dear,
Often have you (often have you, thanks therefore)
Desired my Cressid in right great exchange.
Whom Troy has still denied: but this Anthenor,
I know is such a wrest in their affairs;
That their negotiations all must slack,
Wanting his manage: and they will almost,
Give us a Prince of blood, a Son of Priam,
In change of him. Let him be sent great Princes,
And he shall buy my Daughter: and her presence,
Shall quite strike off all service I have done,
In most accepted pain.

Let Diomedes bear him,
And bring us Cressid hither: Calcas shall have
What he requests of us: good Diomed
Furnish you fairly for this enterchange;
Withal bring word, if Hector will to morrow
Be answered in his challenge. Ajax is ready.

This shall I undertake, and it is a burden
Which I am proud to bear.

Achilles stands in th entrance of his Tent;
Please it our General to pass strangely by him,
As if he were forgot: and Princes all,
Lay negligent and loose regard upon him;
I will come last, it is like heel question me,
Why such vnpla^siue eyes are bent? why turned on him?
If so, I have derision medicinable,
To use between your strangeness and his pride,
Which his own will shall have desire to drink;
It may do good, pride has no other glass
To show it self, but pride: for supple knees,
Feed arrogance, and are the proud man's fees.

We Will execute your purpose, and put on
A form of strangeness as we pass along,
So do each Lord, and either greet him not,
Or else disdainfully, which shall shake him more,
Then if not looked on. I will lead the way.

What comes the General to speak with me?
You know my mind, I Will fight no more against Troy.

What says Achilles, would he ought with us?


Would you my Lord ought with the General?


No.


Nothing my Lord.


The better.


Good day, good day.


How do you? how do you?


What, does the Cuckold scorn me?


How now Patroclus?


Good morrow Ajax?


Ha.


Good morrow.


I, and good next day too.


What mean these fellows? know they not Achilles?


They pass by strangely: they were used to bend
To send their smiles before them to Achilles:
To come as humbly as they used to creep to holy Altars.

What am I poor of late?
It Is certain, greatness once fallen out with fortune,
Must fall out with men too: what the declined is,
He shall as soon read in the eyes of others,
As feel in his own fall: for men like butter-flies,
Show not their mealie wings, but to the Summer:
And not a man for being simply man,
Has any honor; but honored for those honors
That are without him; as place, riches, and favor,
Prizes of accident, as often as merit:
Which when they fall, as being slippery standers;
The love that leand on them as slippery too,
Does one pluck down another, and together
Dye in the fall. But it is not so with me;
Fortune and I are friends, I do enjoy
At ample point, all that I did possess,
Save these men's looks: who do me thinks find out
Something not worth in me such rich beholding,
As they have often given. Here is Ulysses,
I Will interrupt his reading: how now Ulysses?

Now great Thetis Son.


What are you reading?


A strange fellow here
Writes me, that man, how dearly ever parted,
How much in having, or without, or in,
Cannot make boast to have that which he has;
Nor feels not what he owes, but by reflection:
As when his virtues shining upon others,
Heat them, and they retort that heat again
To the first giver.

This is not strange Ulysses:
The beauty that is borne here in the face,
The bearer knows not, but commends it self,
Not going from it self: but eye to eye opposed
Salutes each other with each others form:
For speculation turns not to it self,
Till it has trauail'd, and is married there
Where it may see it self: this is not strange at all.

I do not strain it at the position,
It is familiar; but at the Authors drift,
Who in his circumstance, expressly proves
That no may is the Lord of any thing,
(Though in and of him there is much consisting,)
Till he communicate his parts to others:
Nor does he of himself know them for ought,
Till he behold them formed in the applause,
Where they are extended: who like an arch reuerb'rate
The voice again; or like a gate of steel,
Fronting the Sun, receives and renders back
His figure, and his heat. I was much rapt in this,
And apprehended here immediately:
The unknown Ajax;
Heavens what a man is there? a very Horse,
That has he knows not what. Nature, what things there are.
Most abject in regard, and dear in use.
What things again most dear in the esteem,
And poor in worth: now shall we see to morrow,
An act that very chance does throw upon him?
Ajax renowned? O heavens, what some men do,
While some men leave to do!
How some men creep in skittish fortunes hall,
Whiles others play the Idiots in her eyes:
How one man eats into another pride,
While pride is feasting in his wantonness
To see these Grecian Lords; why, even already,
They clap the lubber Ajax on the shoulder,
As if his foot were on brave Hectors breast,
And great Troy shrinking.

I do believe it:
For they past by me, as my sers do by beggars,
Neither gave to me good word, nor look:
What are my deeds forgot?

Time has (my Lord) a wallet at his back,
Wherein he puts alms for oblivion:
A great sized monster of ingratitudes:
Those scraps are good deeds past,
Which are devoured as fast as they are made,
Forgot as soon as done: perseverance, dear my Lord,
Keeps honor bright, to have done, is to hang
Quite out of fashion, like a rustie male,
In monumentall mockrie: take the instant way,
For honor travels in a straight so narrow,
Where one but goes a breast, keep then the path:
For emulation has a thousand Sons,
That one by one pursue; if you give way,
Or hedge aside from the direct forth right;
Like to an entered Tide, they all rush by,
And leave you hindmost:
Or like a gallant Horse fallen in first rank,
Lie there for pauement to the abject, near
Ore-run and trampled on: then what they do in present,
Though less then yours in past, must ore-top yours:
For time is like a fashionable Host,
That slightly shakes his parting Guest by the hand;
And with his arms out-stretcht, as he would fly,
Graspes in the commer: the welcome ever smiles,
And farewels goes out sighing: O let not virtue seek
Remuneration for the thing it was: for beauty, wit,
High birth, vigor of bone, desert in service,
Love, friendship, charity, are subjects all
To envious and calumniating time:
One touch of nature makes the whole world kin:
That all with one consent praise newborn gaudes,
Though they are made and molded of things past,
And go to dust, that is a little guilt,
More laud then guilt ore dusted.
The present eye praises the present object:
Then marvel not thou great and complete man,
That all the Greeks begin to worship Ajax;
Since things in motion begin to catch the eye,
Then what not sti^s: the cry went out on thee,
And still it might, and yet it may again,
If thou would not entombe thy self alive,
And case thy reputation in thy Tent;
Whose glorious deeds, but in these fields of late,
Made emulous missions amongst the gods themselves,
And drove great Mars to faction.

Of this my priuacie,
I have strong reasons.

But against your priuacie
The reasons are more potent and heroycall:
It Is known Achilles, that you are in love
With one of Priams daughters.

Ha? known?


Is that a wonder?
The providence that is in a watchful State,
Knows almost every grain of Plutoes gold;
Finds bottom in the vncomprehensiue deepes;
Keeps place with thought; and almost like the gods,
Do thoughts vnuaile in their dumb cradles:
There is a mystery (with whom relation
Durst never meddle) in the soul of State;
Which has an operation more divine,
Then breath or pen can give expressure to:
All the commerse that you have had with Troy,
As perfectly is ours, as yours, my Lord.
And better would it fit Achilles much,
To throw down Hector then Polixena.
But it must grieve young Pirhus now at home,
When fame shall in her Hand sound her trumpe;
And all the Greekish Girls shall tripping sing,
Great Hectors sister did Achilles win;
But our great Ajax bravely beat down him.
Farewell my Lord: I as your lover speak;
The fool slides ore the Ice that you should break.

To this effect Achilles have I moved you;
A woman impudent and mannish grown,
Is not more loathed, then an effeminate man,
In time of action: I stand condemned for this;
They think my little stomach to the war,
And your great love to me, restraines you thus:
Sweet, rouse your self; and the weak wanton Cupid
Shall from your neck unloose his amorous fould,
And like a dew drop from the Lions mane,
Be shook to ayrie air.

Shall Ajax fight with Hector?


I, and perhaps receive much honor by him.


I see my reputation is at stake,
My fame is shrowdly gored.

O then beware:
Those wounds heal ill, that men do give themselves:
Omission to do what is necessary,
Seals a commission to a blanke of danger,
And danger like an ague subtly taints
Even then when we sit idely in the sun.

Go call Thersites hither sweet Patroclus,
I Will send the fool to Ajax, and desire him
TO inuit the Trojan Lords after the Combat
To see us here unarmed: I have a woman's longing,
An appetite that I am sick withal,
To see great Hector in his weeds of peace;
To talk with him, and to behold his visage,
Even to my full of view. A labor saved.

A wonder.


What?


Ajax goes up and down the field, asking for himself.


How so?


He must fight singly to morrow with Hector, and is so prophetically proud of
an heroical cudgelling, that he raues in saying nothing


How can that be?


Why he stalks up and down like a Peacock, a stride and a stand: ruminates
like an hostess, that has no Arithmatique but her brain to set down her
reckoning: bites his lip with a politic regard, as who should say, there were
wit in his head and twoo'd out; and so there is: but it lies as coldly in him,
as fire in a flint, which will not show without knocking. The man's undone for
ever; for if Hector break not his neck in the combat, heel break't himself
in vainglory. He knows not me: I said, good morrow Ajax; And he replies,
thanks Agamemnon, What think you of this man, that takes me for the General?
He Is grown a very land-fish, languagelesse, a monster: a plague of opinion, a
man may wear it on both sides like a leather Ierkin


Thou must be my Ambassador to him Thersites.


Who, I: why* heel answer no body: he professes not answering; speaking is for
beggars: he wears his tongue in's arms: I will put on his presence; let
Patroclus make his demands to me, you shall see the Pageant of Ajax


To him Patroclus; tell him, I humbly desire the valiant Ajax, to inuit the
most valorous Hector, to come unarmed to my Tent, and to procure safe conduct
for his person, of the magnanimious and most illustrious, six or feauen times
honored Captain, General of the Grecian Army Agamemnon, etc. do this


Jove bless great Ajax.


Hum.


I come from the worthy Achilles.


Ha?


Who most humbly desires you to inuit Hector to his Tent.


Hum.


And to procure safe conduct from Agamemnon.


Agamemnon?


I my Lord.


Ha?


What say you to it.


God buy you with all my heart.


Your anfwer sir.


If to morrow be a fair day, by eleven a clock it will go one way or other;
howsoever, he shall pay for me ere he has me


Your answer sir.


Fare you well withal my heart.


Why, but he is not in this tune, is he?


No, but he is out a tune thus: what music will be in him when Hector has
knocked out his brains, I know not: but I am sure none, unless the Fiddler
Apollo get his sinews to make catlings on


Come, thou shall bear a Letter to him straight.


Let me carry another to his Horse; for that is the more capable creature.


My mind is troubled like a Fountain stirred,
And I my self see not the bottom of it.

Would the Fountain of your mind were clear again, that I might water an
Ass at it: I had rather be a Ticke in a Sheep, then such a valiant ignorance


See hoa, who is that there?


It is the Lord Aeneas.


Is the Prince there in person?
Had I so good occasion to lie long
As you Prince Paris, nothing but heavenly business,
Should rob my bed-mate of my company.

That Is my mind too: good morrow Lord Aeneas.


A valiant Greek Aeneas, take his hand,
Witness the process of your speech within;
You told how Diomed, in a whole week by days
Did haunt you in the Field.

Health to you valiant sir,
During all question of the gentle truce:
But when I meet you armed, as black defiance,
As heart can think, or courage execute.

The one and other Diomed embraces,
Our bloods are now in calm; and so long health:
But when contention, and occasion meets,
By Jove, I Will play the hunter for thy life,
With all my force, pursuit and policy.

And thou shall hunt a Lion that will fly
With his face backward, in human gentleness:
Welcome to Troy; now by Anchises life,
Welcome indeed: by Venus hand I swear,
No man alive can love in such a sort,
The thing he means to kill, more excellently,

We simpathize. Jove let Aeneas live
(If to my sword his fate be not the glory)
A thousand complete courses of the Sun,
But in mine emulous honor let him dye:
With every joint a wound, and that to morrow.

We know each other well.


We do, and long to know each other worse.


This is the most, despightful'st gentle greeting;
The noblest hateful love, that ere I heard of.
What business Lord so early?

I was sent for to the King; but why, I know not.


His purpose meets you; it was to bring this Greek
To Calcha's house; and there to render him,
For the enfreed Anthenor, the fair Cressid:
Lets have your company; or if you please,
Haste there before us. I constantly do think
(Or rather call my thought a certain knowledge)
My brother Troylus lodges there to night.
Rouse him, and give him note of our approach,
With the whole quality whereof, I fear
We shall be much unwelcome.

That I assure you:
Troylus had rather Troy were borne to Greece,
Then Cressid borne from Troy.

There is no help:
The bitter disposition of the time will have it so.
On Lord, we will follow you.

Good morrow all.


And tell me noble Diomed; faith tell me true,
Even in the soul of sound good fellowship,
Who in your thoughts merits fair Helen most?
My self, or Menelaus?

Both alike.
He merits well to have her, that does seek her,
Not making any scruple of her soylure,
With such a hell of pain, and world of charge.
And you as well to keep her, that defend her,
Not pallating the taste of her dishonor,
With such a costly loss of wealth and friends:
He like a puling Cuckold, would drink up
The lees and dregs of a flat tamed piece:
You like a letcher, out of whorish loins.
Are pleased to breed out your inheritors:
Both merits poyz'd, each weighs no less nor more,
But he as he, which heavier for a whore.

You are too bitter to your country-woman.


She Is bitter to her country: hear me Paris,
For every false drop in her baudy veins,
A Grecians life has sunk: for every scruple
Of her contaminated carrion weight,
A Trojan has been slain. Since she could speak,
She has not given so many good words breath,
As for her, Greeks and Trojans suffered death.

Fair Diomed, you do as chapmen do,
Dispraise the thing that you desire to buy:
But we in silence hold this virtue well;
We Will not commend, what we intend to sell.
Here lies our way.

Dear trouble not your self: the morn is cold.


Then sweet my Lord, I Will call mine Uncle down;
He shall vnbolt the Gates.

Trouble him not:
To bed, to bed: sleep kill those pretty eyes,
And give as soft attachment to thy senses,
As Infants empty of all thought.

Good morrow then.


I prithee now to bed.


Are you a weary of me?


O Cressida! but that the busy day
Wak't by the Lark, has roused the ribauld Crows,
And dreaming night will hide our eyes no longer:
I would not from thee.

Night has been too brief.


Beshrew the witch! with venomous wights she stays,
As hidiously as hell; but flies the graspes of love,
With wings more momentary, swift then thought:
You will catch cold, and curse me.

Prithee tarry, you men will never tarry;
O foolish Cressid, I might have still held off,
And then you would have tarried. Hark, there is one up?

What Is all the doors open here?


It is your Uncle.


A pestilence on him: now will he be mocking:
I shall have such a life.

How now, how now? how go maiden-heads?
Hear you Maid: where is my cousin Cressid?

Go hang your self, you naughty mocking Uncle:
You bring me to do -- and then you floute me too.

To do what? to do what? let her say what:
What have I brought you to do?

Come, come, beshrew your heart: you will nere be good, nor suffer others.


Ha, ha: alas poor wretch: a poor Chipochia, have not slept to night? would
he not (a naughty man) let it sleep: a bug-beare take him


Did not I tell you? would he were knocked in the head. Who Is that at door? good
Uncle go and see

My Lord, come you again into my Chamber:
You smile and mock me, as if I meant naughtily.

Ha, ha.


Come you are deceived, I think of no such thing.
How earnestly they knock: pray you come in.
I would not for half Troy have you seen here.

Who Is there? what is the matter? will you beat down the door? How now,
what is the matter


Good morrow Lord, good morrow.


Who Is there my Lord Aeneas? by my troth I knew you not: what news with you so
early


Is not Prince Troylus here?


Here? what should he do here?


Come he is here, my Lord, do not deny him:
It does import him much to speak with me.

Is he here say you? it is more then I know, I Will be sworn: For my own part I
came in late: what should he do here


Who, nay then: Come, come, you will do him wrong, ere y' are ware: you will be so
true to him, to be false to him: Do not you know of him, but yet go fetch him
hither, go


How now, what is the matter?


My Lord, I scarce have leisure to salute you,
My matter is so rash: there is at hand,
Paris your brother, and Deiphoebus,
The Grecian Diomed, and our Anthenor
Delivered to us, and for him forthwith,
Ere the first sacrifice, within this hour,
We must give up to Diomeds hand
The Lady Cressida.

Is it concluded so?


By Priam, and the general state of Troy,
They are at hand, and ready to effect it.

How my atchieuements mock me;
I will go meet them: and my Lord Aeneas,
We met by chance; you did not find me here.

Good, good, my Lord, the secrets of nature
Have not more gift in taciturnitie.

Is It possible? no sooner got but lost: the devil take Anthenor; the young
Prince will go mad: a plague upon Anthenor; I would they had brok's neck


How now? what is the matter? who was here?


Ah, ha!


Why sigh you so profoundly? where is my Lord? gone? tell me sweet Uncle, what is
the matter


Would I were as deep under the earth as I am above.


O the gods! what is the matter?


Prithee get thee in: would thou had nere been borne; I knew thou would
be his death. O poor Gentleman: a plague upon Anthenor


Good Uncle I beseech you, on my knees, I beseech you what is the matter?


Thou must be gone wench, thou must be gone; thou art changed for Anthenor:
thou must to thy Father, and be gone from Troylus: 'twill be his death: 'twill
be his baine, he cannot bear it


O you immortal gods! I will not go.


Thou must.


I will not Uncle: I have forgot my Father:
I know no touch of consanguinitie:
No kin, no love, no blood, no soul, so near me,
As the sweet Troylus: O you gods divine!
Make Cressids name the very crown of falsehood!
If ever she leave Troylus: time, orce and death,
Do to this body what extremity you can;
But the strong base and building of my love,
Is as the very Center of the earth,
Drawing all things to it. I will go in and weep.

Do, do.


Tear my bright heir, and scratch my praised cheeks,
Crack my clear voice with sobs, and break my heart
With sounding Troylus. I will not go from Troy.

It is great morning, and the hour prefixed
Of her delivery to this valiant Greek
Comes fast upon: good my brother Troylus,
Tell you the Lady what she is to do,
And have her to the purpose.

Walk into her house:
I Will bring her to the Grecian presently;
And to his hand, when I deliver her,
Think it an Altar, and thy brother Troylus
A Priest, there offering to it his heart.

I know what it is to love,
And would, as I shall pity, I could help.
Please you walk in, my Lords.

Be moderate, be moderate.


Why tell you me of moderation?
The grief is fine, full perfect that I taste,
And no less in a sense as strong
As that which causes it. How can I moderate it?
If I could temporise with my affection,
Or brew it to a weak and colder pallat,
The like alaiment could I give my grief:
My love admits no qualifying cross;
No more my grief, in such a precious loss.

Here, here, here, he comes, a sweet ducke.


O Troylus, Troylus!


What a pair of spectacles is here? let me embrace too: oh heart, as the goodly
saying is; O heart, heavy heart, why sighest thou without breaking? where he
answers again; because thou can not ease thy smart by friendship, nor by
speaking: there was never a truer rhyme; let us cast away nothing, for we may
live to have need of such a Verse: we see it, we see it: how now Lambs


Cressid: I love thee in so strange a purity;
That the blessed gods, as angry with my fancy,
More bright in zeal, then the devotion which
Cold lips blow to their Deities: take thee from me.

Have the gods envy?


I, I, I, I, it is too plain a case.


And is it true, that I must go from Troy?


A hateful truth.


What, and from Troylus too?


From Troy, and Troylus.


Is It possible?


And suddenly, where injury of chance
Puts back leaue-taking, iustles roughly by
All time of pause; rudely beguiles our lips
Of all reioyndure: forcibly preuents
Our locked embrasures; strangles our dear vows,
Even in the birth of our own laboring breath.
We two, that with so many thousand sighs
Did buy each other, must poorly sell our selves,
With the rude brevity and discharge of our
Injurious time; now with a robbers haste
Crams his rich theeuerie up, he knows not how.
As many farwels as be stars in heaven,
With distinct breath, and consigned kisses to them,
He fumbles up into a loose adieu;
And scants us with a single famisht kiss,
Distasting with the salt of broken tears.

My Lord, is the Lady ready?


Hark, you are called: some say the genius so
Cries, come to him that instantly must dye.
Bid them have patience: she shall come anon.

Where are my tears? rain, to lay this wind, or my heart will be blown up
by the root


I must then to the Grecians?


No remedy.


A woeful Cressid amongst the merry Greeks.


When shall we see again?


Here me my love: be thou but true of heart.


I true? how now? what wicked deem is this?


Nay, we must use expostulation kindly,
For it is parting from us:
I speak not, be thou true, as fearing thee:
For I will throw my Glove to death himself,
That there is no maculation in thy heart:
But be thou true, say I, to fashion in
My sequent protestation: be thou true,
And I will see thee.

O you shall be exposed, my Lord to dangers
As infinite, as imminent: but I Will be true.

And I Will grow friend with danger;
Wear this Sleeue.

And you this Glove.
When shall I see you?

I will corrupt the Grecian Sentinels,
To give thee nightly visitation.
But yet be true.

O heavens: be true again?


Hear why I speak it; Love:
The Grecian youths are full of quality,
Their loving well composed, with gift of nature,
Flawing and swelling ore with Arts and exercise:
How novelties may move, and parts with person.
Alas, a kind of godly jealousy;
Which I beseech you call a virtuous sin:
Makes me afraid.

O heavens, you love me not!


Dye I a villain then:
In this I do not call your faith in question
So mainely as my merit: I cannot sing,
Nor heel the high Lauolt; nor sweeten talk;
Nor play at subtle games; fair virtues all;
To which the Grecians are most prompt and pregnant:
But I can tell that in each grace of these,
There lurkes a still and dumb-discoursiue devil,
That tempts most cunningly: but be not tempted.

Do you think I will:


No, but something may be done that we will not:
And sometimes we are devils to our selves,
When we will tempt the frailty of our powers,
Presuming on their changefull potencie.

Nay, good my Lord?


Come kiss, and let us part.


Brother Troylus?


Good brother come you hither,
And bring Aeneas and the Grecian with you.

My Lord, will you be true?


Who I? alas it is my vice, my fault:
Whiles others fish with craft for great opinion,
I, with great truth, catch mere simplicity;
Whilst some with cunning guild their copper crowns,
With truth and plainness I do wear mine bare:
Fear not my truth; the morrall of my wit
Is plain and true, there is all the reach of it.
Welcome sir Diomed, here is the Lady
Which for Antenor, we deliver you.
At the port (Lord) I Will give her to thy hand,
And by the way possess thee what she is.
Entreat her fair; and by my soul, fair Greek,
If ere thou stand at mercy of my Sword,
Name Cressid, and thy life shall be as safe
As Priam is in Illion?

Fair Lady Cressid,
So please you save the thanks this Prince expects:
The luster in your eye, heaven in your cheek,
Pleades your fair visage, and to Diomed
You shall be mistress, and command him wholly.

Grecian, thou do not use me courteously,
To shame the seal of my petition toward,
I praising her. I tell thee Lord of Greece:
She is as far high soaring over thy praises,
As thou unworthy to be called her servant:
I charge thee use her well, even for my charge:
For by the dreadful Pluto, if thou do not,
(Though the great bulk Achilles be thy guard)
I Will cut thy throat.

Oh be not moved Prince Troylus;
Let me be priuiledg'd by my place and message,
To be a speaker free? when I am hence,
I Will answer to my lust: and know my Lord;
I Will nothing do on charge: to her own worth
She shall be prized: but that you say, be it so;
I Will speak it in my spirit and honor, no.

Come to the Port. I Will tell thee Diomed,
This brave, shall often make thee to hide thy head:
Lady, give me your hand, and as we walk,
To our own selves bend we our needful talk.

Hark, Hectors Trumpet.


How have we spent this morning
The Prince must think me tardy and remiss,
That swore to ride before him in the field.

It Is Troylus fault: come, come, to field with him.


Let us make ready straight.


Yea, with a Bridegroomes fresh alacrity
Let us address to tend on Hectors heels:
The glory of our Troy does this day lie
On his fair worth, and single Chivalry.

Here art thou in appointment fresh and fair,
Anticipating time. With starting courage,
Give with thy Trumpet a loud note to Troy
Thou dreadful Ajax, that the appauled air
May pierce the head of the great Combatant,
And hale him hither.

Thou, Trumpet, there is my purse;
Now crack thy lungs, and split thy brazen pipe:
Blow villain, till thy sphered Bias cheek
Out-swell the collicke of puffed Aquilon:
Come, stretch thy chest, and let thy eyes spout blood:
Thou blowest for Hector.

No Trumpet answers.


It Is but early days.


Is not young Diomed with Calcas daughter?


It Is he, I ken the manner of his gate,
He rises on the toe: that spirit of his
In aspiration lifts him from the earth.

Is this the Lady Cressid?


Even she.


Most dearly welcome to the Greeks, sweet Lady.


Our General does salute you with a kiss.


Yet is the kindness but particular; 'twere better she were kissed in general.


And very courtly counsel: I Will begin. So much for Nestor.


I Will take that winter from your lips fair Lady Achilles bids you welcome.


I had good argument for kissing once.


But that is no argument for kissing now;
For thus pop't Paris in his hardiment.

Oh deadly gall, and theme of all our scorns,
For which we loose our heads, to gild his horns.

The first was Menelaus kiss, this mine:
Patroclus kisses you.

Oh this is trim.


Paris and I kiss evermore for him.


I Will have my kiss sir: Lady by your leave.


In kissing do you render, or receive.


Both take and give.


I Will make my match to live,
The kiss you take is better then you give: therefore no kiss.

I Will give you boot, I Will give you three for one.


You are an odd man, give even, or give none.


An odd man Lady, every man is odd.


No, Paris is not; for you know it is true,
That you are odd, and he is even with you.

You fillip me a' the head.


No, I Will be sworn.


It were no match, your nail against his horn:
May I sweet Lady beg a kiss of you?

You may.


I do desire it.


Why beg then?


Why then for Venus sake, give me a kiss:
When Hellen is a maid again, and his --

I am your debtor, claim it when it is due.


Neuer's my day, and then a kiss of you.


Lady a word, I Will bring you to your Father.


A woman of quick sense.


Fie, fie, upon her:
There Is a language in her eye, her cheek, her lip;
Nay, her foot speaks, her wanton spirits look out
At every joint, and motive of her body:
Oh these encounterers so glib of tongue,
That give a coasting welcome ete it comes;
And wide unclasp the tables of their thoughts,
To every tickling reader: set them down,
For sluttish spoils of opportunity;
And daughters of the game.

The Trojans Trumpet.


Yonder comes the troop.


Hail all you state of Greece: what shall be done
To him that victory commands? or do you purpose,
A victor shall be known: will you the Knights
Shall to the edge of all extremity
Pursue each other* or shall be divided
By any voice, or order of the field: Hector bad ask?

Which way would Hector have it?


He cares not, heel obey conditions.


It Is done like Hector, but securely done,
A little proudly, and great deal disprising
The Knight opposed.

If not Achilles sir, what is your name?


If not Achilles, nothing.


Therefore Achilles: but what ere, know this.
In the extremity of great and little:
Valor and pride excel themselves in Hector;
The one almost as infinite as all;
The other blanke as nothing: weigh him well:
And that which looks like pride, is courtesy:
This Ajax is half made of Hectors blood;
In love whereof, half Hector stays at home:
Half heart, half hand, half Hector, comes to seek
This blended Knight, half Trojan, and half Greek.

A maiden battle then? O I perceive you.


Here is sir, Diomed: go gentle Knight,
Stand by our Ajax: as you and Lord Aeneas
Consent upon the order of their fight,
So be it: either to the uttermost,
Or else a breach: the Combatants being kin,
Half stints their strife, before their strokes begin.

They are opposed already.


What Trojan is that same that looks so heavy?


The youngest Son of Priam;
A true Knight; they call him Troylus;
Not yet mature, yet matchless, firm of word,
Speaking in deeds, and deedelesse in his tongue;
Not soon prouok't, nor being prouok't, soon calmed;
His heart and hand both open, and both free:
For what he has, he gives; what thinks, he shows;
Yet gives he not till judgment guide his bounty,
Nor dignifies an impair thought with breath:
Manly as Hector, but more dangerous;
For Hector in his blaze of wrath subscribes
To tender objects; but he, in heat of action,
Is more vindecatiue then jealous love.
They call him Troylus; and on him erect,
A second hope, as fairly built as Hector.
Thus says Aeneas, one that knows the youth,
Even to his inches: and with private soul,
Did in great Illion thus translate him to me.

They are in action.


Now Ajax hold thine own.


Hector, thou sleep'st, awake thee.


His blows are well disposed there Ajax.


You must no more.


Princes enough, so please you.


I am not warm yet, let us fight again.


As Hector pleases.


Why then will I no more:
Thou art great Lord, my Fathers sisters Son;
A cosen german to great Priams seed:
The obligation of our blood forbids
A gorie emulation 'twixt us twain:
Were thy commixion, Greek and Trojan so,
That thou could say, this hand is Grecian all,
And this is Trojan: the sinews of this Leg,
All Greek, and this all Troy: my Mothers blood
Runs on the dexter cheek, and this sinister
Bounds in my fathers: by Jove multipotent,
Thou should not bear from me a Greekish member
Wherein my sword had not impressure made
Of our rank feud: but the just gods gainsay,
That any drop thou borrwd'st from thy mother,
My sacred Aunt, should by my mortal Sword
Be drained. Let me embrace thee Ajax:
By him that thunders, thou have lusty Arms;
Hector would have them fall upon him thus.
Cozen, all honor to thee.

I thank thee Hector:
Thou art too gentle, and too free a man:
I came to kill thee Cozen, and bear hence
A great addition, earned in thy death.

Not Neoptolymus so mirable,
On whose bright crest, fame with her lowd'st (O yes)
Cries, This is he; could promise to himself,
A thought of added honor, torn from Hector.

There is expectance here from both the sides,
What further you will do?

We Will answer it:
The issue is embracement: Ajax, farewell.

If I might in entreaties find success,
As seld I have the chance; I would desire
My famous Cousin to our Grecian Tents.

It Is Agamemnons wish, and great Achilles
Does long to see unarmed the valiant Hector.

Aeneas, call my brother Troylus to me:
And signify this loving enterview
To the expecters of our Trojan part:
Desire them home. Give me thy hand, my Cousin:
I will go eat with thee, and see your Knights.

Great Agamemnon comes to meet us here.


The worthiest of them, tell me name by name:
But for Achilles, mine own serching eyes
Shall find him by his large and portly size.

Worthy of Arms: as welcome as to one*
That would be rid of such an enemy.
But that is no welcome: understand more clear
What Is past, and what is to come, is strewn with husks
And formelesse ruin of oblivion:
But in this extant moment, faith and troth,
Strained purely from all hollow bias drawing:
Bids thee with most divine integrity.
From heart of very heart, great Hector welcome.

I thank thee most imperious Agamemnon.


My well-fam'd Lord of Troy, no less to you.


Let me confirm my Princely brothers greeting,
You brace of warlike Brothers, welcome hither.

Who must we answer?


The Noble Menelaus.


O, you my Lord, by Mars his gauntlet thanks,
Mock not, that I affect the vntraded Oath,
Your quondam wife swears still by Venus Glove
She Is well, but bad me not commend her to you.

Name her not now sir, she is a deadly Theme.


O pardon, I offend.


I have (thou gallant Troyan) seen thee often
Laboring for destiny, make cruel way
Through ranks of Greekish youth: and I have seen thee
As hot as Perseus, spur thy Phrygian Steed,
And seen thee scorning forfeits and subduments,
When thou have hung thy advanced sword in the air,
Not letting it decline, on the declined:
That I have said unto my standers by,
Lo Jupiter is yonder, dealing life.
And I have seen thee pause, and take thy breath,
When that a ring of Greeks have hemmed thee in,
Like an Olympian wrestling. This have I seen,
But this thy countenance (still locked in steel)
I never saw till now. I knew thy Grandsire,
And once fought with him; he was a Soldier good,
But by great Mars, the Captain of us all,
Never like thee. Let an oldman embrace thee,
And (worthy Warrior) welcome to our Tents.

It Is the old Nestor.


Let me embrace thee good old Chronicle,
That have so long walked hand in hand with time:
Most reverend Nestor, I am glad to claspe thee.

I would my arms could match thee in contention
As they contend with thee in courtesy.

I would they could.


Ha? by this white beard I Would fight with thee to morrow. Well, welcome, welcome:
I have seen the time


I wonder now, how yonder City stands,
When we have here her Base and pillar by us.

I know your favor Lord Ulysses well.
Ah sir, there is many a Greek and Troyan dead,
Since first I saw your self, and Diomed
In Illion, on your Greekish Embassy.

Sir, I foretold you then what would ensue,
My prophecy is but half his journey yet;
For yonder walls that pertly front your Town,
Yond Towers, whose wanton tops do busse the clouds,
Must kiss their own feet.

I must not believe you:
There they stand yet: and modestly I think,
The fall of every Phrygian stone will cost
A drop of Grecian blood: the end crowns all,
And that old common Arbitrator, Time,
Will one day end it.

So to him we leave it.
Most gentle, and most valiant Hector, welcome;
After the General, I beseech you next
To Feast with me, and see me at my Tent.

I shall forestall thee Lord Ulysses, thou:
Now Hector I have fed mine eyes on thee,
I have with exact view perused thee Hector,
And quoted joint by joint.

Is this Achilles?


I am Achilles.


Stand fair I prithee, let me look on thee.


Behold thy fill.


Nay, I have done already.


Thou art to brief, I will the second time,
As I would buy thee, view thee, limb by limb.

O like a Book of sport thou wilt read me ore:
But there is more in me then thou vnderstand'st.
Why do thou so oppress me with thine eye?

Tell me you Heavens, in which part of his body
Shall I destroy him? Whether there, or there, or there,
That I may give the local wound a name,
And make distinct the very breach, where-out
Hectors great spirit fl^w. Answer me heavens.

It would discredit the blessed Gods, proud man,
To answer such a question: Stand again;
Think thou to catch my life so pleasantly,
As to prenominate in nice conjecture
Where thou will hit me dead?

I tell thee yea.


Were thou the Oracle to tell me so,
I Would not believe thee: henceforth guard thee well,
For I Will not kill thee there, nor there, nor there,
But by the forge that stythied Mars his helm,
I Will kill thee every where, yea, ore and ore.
You wisest Grecians, pardon me this brag,
His insolence draws folly from my lips,
But I Will endeavor deeds to match these words,
Or may I never --

Do not chafe thee Cousin:
And you Achilles, let these threats alone
Till accident, or purpose bring you to it.
You may every day enough of Hector.
If you have stomach. The general state I fear,
Can scarce entreat you to be odd with him.

I pray you let us see you in the field,
We have had pelting Wars since you refused
The Grecians cause.

Do thou entreat me Hector?
To morrow do I meet thee fell as death,
To night, all Friends.

Thy hand upon that match.


First, all you Peers of Greece go to my Tent,
There in the full conuiue you: Afterward,
As Hectors leisure, and your bounties shall
Concur together, severally entreat him.
Beat loud the Taborins, let the Trumpets blow,
That this great Soldier may his welcome know.

My Lord Ulysses, tell me I beseech you,
In what place of the Field does Calchas keep?

At Menelaus Tent, most Princely Troylus,
There Diomed does feast with him to night,
Who neither looks on heaven, nor on earth,
But gives all gaze and bent of amorous view
On the fair Cressid.

Shall I (sweet Lord) be bound to thee so much,
After we part from Agamemnons Tent,
To bring me thither?

You shall command me sir:
As gentle tell me, of what Honor was
This Cressida in Troy, had she no Lover there
That wailes her absence?

O sir, to such as boasting show their scarres,
A mock is due: will you walk on my Lord?
She was beloved, she loved; she is, and does;
But still sweet Love is food for Fortunes tooth.

I Will heat his blood with Greekish wine to night,
Which with my Cemitar I Will cool to morrow:
Patroclus, let us Feast him to the hight.

Here comes Thersites.


How now, thou core of Envy?
Thou crusty batch of Nature, what is the news?

Why thou picture of what thou seem, and I doll of Ideot-worshippers, here is
a Letter for thee


From whence, Fragment?


Why thou full dish of Fool, from Troy.


Who keeps the Tent now?


The Surgeons box, or the Patients wound.


Well said adversity, and what need these tricks?


Prithee be silent boy, I profit not by thy talk, thou art thought to be
Achilles male Varlot


Male Varlot you Rogue? What Is that?


Why his masculine Whore. Now the rotten diseases of the South, guts-griping
Ruptures, Catarres, Loades a gravel in the back, Lethargies, cold Palsies,
and the like, take and take again, such prepostrous discoueries


Why thou damnable box of envy thou, what mean thou to curse thus?


Do I curse thee?


Why no, you ruinous But, you whoreson indistinguishable Curre.


No? why art thou then exasperate, thou idle, immateriall skiene of Sleyd
silk; thou green Sarcenet flap for a sore eye, thou tassell of a Prodigals
purse thou

Ah how the poor world is pestred with such water-flies, diminutiues of Nature.


Out gall.


Finch Egg.


My sweet Patroclus, I am thwarted quite
From my great purpose in to morrowes battle:
Here is a Letter from Queen Hecuba,
A token from her daughter, my fair Love,
Both taxing me, and gaging me to keep
An Oath that I have sworn. I will not break it,
Fall Greeks, fail Fame, Honor or go, or stay,
My mayor vow lies here; this I Will obey:
Come, come Thersites, help to trim my Tent,
This night in banqueting must all be spent.
Away Patroclus.

With too much blood, and too little Brain, these two may run mad: but if with
too much brain, and too little blood, they do, I Will be a curer of madmen.
Here Is Agamemnon, an honest fellow enough, and one that loves Quails, but he
has not so much Brain as eare-wax; and the goodly transformation of Jupiter
there his Brother, the Bull, the primative Statue, and oblique memorial of
Cuckolds, a thrifty shooing-horne in a chain, hanging at his Brothers leg,
to what form but that he is, should wit larded with malice, and malice forced
with wit, turn him too: to an Ass were nothing; he is both Ass and Ox; to
an Ox were nothing, he is both Ox and Ass: to be a Dog, a Mule, a Cat, a
Fitchew, a Toade, a Lizard, an Owl, a Puttocke, or a Herring without a Roe, I
would not care: but to be Menelaus, I would conspire against Destiny. Ask me
not what I would be, if I were not Thersites: sot I care not to be the lowse
of a Lazar, so I were not Menelaus. Hoy-day, spirits and fires


We go wrong, we go wrong.


No yonder'tis, there where we see the light.


I trouble you.


No, not a whit.


Here comes himself to guide you?


Welcome brave Hector, welcome Princes all.


So now fair Prince of Troy, I bid goodnight,
Ajax commands the guard to tend on you.

Thanks, and goodnight to the Greeks general.


Goodnight my Lord.


Goodnight sweet Lord Menelaus.


Sweet draught: sweet quoth-a? sweet sink, sweet sure.


Goodnight and welcome, both at once, to those that go, or tarry.


Goodnight.


Old Nestor tarries, and you too Diomed,
Keep Hector company an hour, or two.

I cannot Lord, I have important business,
The tide whereof is now, goodnight great Hector.

Give me your hand.


Follow his Torch, he goes to Chalcas Tent,
I Will keep you company.

Sweet sir, you honor me.


And so good night.


Come, come, enter my Tent.


That same Diomed's a false-hearted Rogue, a most unjust Knave; I will no more
trust him when he leeres, then I will a Serpent when he hisses: he will spend
his mouth and promise, like Brabler the Hound; but when he performs,
Astronomers foretell it, that it is prodigious, there will come some change;
the Sun borrowes of the Moon when Diomed keeps his word. I will rather
leave to see Hector, then not to dog him: they say, he keeps a Troyan Drab,
and uses the Traitor Chalcas his Tent. I Will after -- Nothing but Letcherie? All
incontinent Varlets


What are you up here ho? speak?


Who calls?


Diomed, Chalcas (I think) where is you Daughter?


She comes to you.


Stand where the Torch may not discover us.


Cressid comes forth to him.


How now my charge?


Now my sweet guardian: hark a word with you.


Yea, so familiar?


She will sing any man at first sight.


And any man may find her, if he can take her life: she is noted.


Will you remember?


Remember? yes.


Nay, but do then; and let your mind be coupled with your words.


What should she remember?


List?


Sweet honey Greek, tempt me no more to folly.


Roguery.


Nay then.


I Will tell you what.


Fo, fo, come tell a pin, you are a forsworn. --


In faith I cannot: what would you have me do?


A iugling trick, to be secretly open.


What did you swear you would bestow on me?


I prithee do not hold me to mine oath,
Bid me do not any thing but that sweet Greek.

Good night.


Hold, patience.


How now Trojan?


Diomed.


No, no, good night: I Will be your fool no more.


Thy better must.


Hark one word in your ear.


O plague and madness!


You are moved Prince, let us depart I pray you,
Lest your displeasure should enlarge it self
To wrathful terms: this place is dangerous;
The time right deadly: I beseech you go.

Behold, I pray you.


Nay, good my Lord go off:
You flow to great distraction; come my Lord?

I pray thee stay?


You have not patience, come.


I pray you stay? by hell and hell torments,
I will not speak a word.

And so good night.


Nay, but you part in anger.


Does that grieve thee? O withered truth!


Why, how now Lord?


By Jove I will be patient.


Guardian? why Greek?


Fo, fo, adieu, you palter,


In faith I do not: come hither once again.


You shake my Lord at something; will you go? you will break out.


She strokes his cheek.


Come, come.


Nay stay, by Jove I will not speak a word.
There is between my will, and all offenses,
A guard of patience; stay a little while.

How the devil Luxury with his fat rumpe and potato finger, tickles these
together: frye lechery, frye


But will you then?


In faith I will lo; never trust me else.


Give me some token for the surety of it.


I Will fetch you one.


You have sworn patience.


Fear me not sweet Lord.
I will not be my self, nor have cognition
Of what I feel: I am all patience.

Now the pledge, now, now, now.


Here Diomed, keep this Sleeue.


O beauty! where is thy Faith?


My Lord.


I will be patient, outwardly I will.


You look upon that Sleeue? behold it well:
He loved me: O false wench: giue't me again.

Whose was it?


It is no matter now I haue't again.
I will not meet with you to morrow night:
I prithee Diomed visit me no more.

Now she sharpens: well said Whetstone.


I shall have it.


What, this?


I that.


O all you gods! O pretty, pretty pledge;
Thy Master now lies thinking in his bed
Of thee and me, and sighs, and takes my Glove,
And gives memorial dainty kisses to it;
As I kiss thee.

Nay, do not snatch it from me.


He that takes that, rakes my heart withal.


I had your heart before, this follows it.


I did swear patience.


You shall not have it Diomed; faith you shall not:
I Will give you something else.

I will have this: whose was it?


It is no matter.


Come tell me whose it was?


'Twas one that loved me better then you will.
But now you have it, take it.

Whose was it?


By all Diana^ waiting women yond:
And by her self, I will not tell you whose.

To morrow will I wear it on my Helm,
And grieve his spirit that dares not challenge it.

Were thou the devil, and wor'st it on thy horn.
It should be challenged.

Well, well, it is done, it is past; and yet it is not:
I will not keep my word.

Why then farewell,
Thou never shall mock Diomed again.

You shall not go: one cannot speak a word,
But it strait starts you.

I do not like this fooling.


Nor I by Pluto: but that that likes not me, pleases me best.


What shall I come? the hour.


I, come: O Jove! do, come: I shall be plagued.


Farewell till then.


Good night: I prithee come:
Troylus farewell; one eye yet looks on thee;
But with my heart, the other eye, does see.
Ah poor our sex; this fault in us I find:
The error of our eye, directs our mind.
What error leads, must err: O then conclude,
Minds swai'd by eyes, are full of turpitude.

A proof of strength she could not publish more;
Unless she say, my mind is now turned whore.

All Is done my Lord.


It is.


Why stay we then?


To make a recordation to my soul
Of every syllable that here was spoke:
But if I tell how these two did coact;
Shall I not lie, in publishing a truth?
Since yet there is a credence in my heart:
An esperance so obstinately strong,
That does inuert that test of eyes and ears;
As if those organs had deceptious functions,
Created only to calumniate.
Was Cressed here?

I cannot conjure Trojan.


She was not sure.


Most sure she was.


Why my negation has no taste of madness?


Nor mine my Lord: Cressid was here but now.


Let it not be believed for womanhood:
Think we had mothers; do not give advantage
To stubborn Critics, apt without a theme
For deprauation, to square the general sex
By Cressids rule. Rather think this not Cressid.

What has she done Prince, that can soil our mothers?


Nothing at all, unless that this were she.


Will he swagger himself out on's own eyes?


This she? no, this is Diomids Cressid^:
If beauty have a soul, this is not she:
If souls guide vows; if vows are sanctimonie;
If sanctimonie be the gods delight:
If there be rule in unity it self,
This is not she: O madness of discourse
That cause sets up, with, and against thy self
By foul authority: where reason can revolt
Without perdition, and loss assume all reason,
Without revolt. This is, and is not Cressid:
Within my soul, there does conduce a fight
Of this strange nature, that a thing inseperate,
Diuides more wider then the sky and earth:
And yet the spacious breadth of this division*
Admits no Orifex for a point as subtle,
As Ariachnes broken woofe to enter:
Instance, O instance! strong as Plutoes gates:
Cressid is mine, tied with the bonds of heaven;
Instance, O instance, strong as heaven it self:
The bonds of heaven are slipped, dissolved, and loosed,
And with another knot five finger tied,
The fractions of her faith, orts of her love:
The fragments, scraps, the bits, and greazie relics,
Of her ore-eaten faith, are bound to Diomed

May worthy Troylus be half attached
With that which here his passion does express?

I Greek: and that shall be divulged well
In Characters, as red as Mars his heart
Inflamed with Venus: never did young man fancy
With so eternal, and so fixed a soul.
Hark Greek: as much I do Cressida love;
So much by weight, hate I her Diomed,
That Sleeue is mine, that heel bear in his Helm:
Were it a Caske composed by Vulcans skill,
My Sword should bite it: Not the dreadful spout,
Which Shipmen do the Hurricano call,
Constring'd in mass by the almighty Fenne,
Shall dizzie with more clamor Neptunes ear
In his descent; then shall my prompted sword,
Falling on Diomed.

Heel tickle it for his concupie.


O Cressid! O false Cressid! false, false, false:
Let all untruths stand by thy stained name,
And they will seem glorious.

O contain your self:
Your passion draws ears hither.

I have been seeking you this hour my Lord:
Hector by this is arming him in Troy.
Ajax your Guard, stays to conduct you home.

Have with you Prince: my courteous Lord adieu:
Farewell revolted fair: and Diomed,
Stand fast, and wear a Castle on thy head.

I Will bring you to the Gates.


Accept distracted thanks.


Would I could meet that rogue Diomed, I would croke like a Raven: I would
bode, I would bode: Patroclus will give me any thing for the intelligence of
this whore: the Parrot will not do more for an Almond, then he for a
commodious drab: Lechery, lechery, still wars and lechery, nothing else holds
fashion. A burning devil take them


When was my Lord so much ungently tempered,
To stop his ears against admonishment?
Unarm, unarm, and do not fight to day.

You train me to offend you: get you gone.
By the everlasting gods, I Will go.

My dreams will sure prove ominous to the day.


No more I say.


Where is my brother Hector?


Here sister, armed, and bloody in intent:
Consort with me in loud and dear petition:
Pursue we him on knees: for I have dreampt
Of bloody turbulence; and this whole night
Has nothing been but shapes, and forms of slaughter.

O, it is true.


Ho? bid my Trumpet sound.


No notes of sallie, for the heavens, sweet brother.


Begone I say: the gods have heard me swear.


The gods are deaf to hot and peevish vows;
They are polluted offerings, more abhord
Then spotted Livers in the sacrifice.

O be persuaded, do not count it holy,
To hurt by being just; it is as lawful:
For we would count give much to as violent thefts,
And rob in the behalf of charity.

It is the purpose that makes strong the vow;
But vows to every purpose must not hold:
Vnatme sweet Hector.

Hold you still I say;
Mine honor keeps the weather of my fate:
Life every man holds dear, but the dear man
Holds honor far more precious, dear, then life.
How now young man? mean thou to fight to day?

Cassandra, call my father to persuade.


No faith young Troylus; doffe thy harness youth:
I am to day in the vain of Chivalry:
Let grow thy Sinews till their knots be strong;
And tempt nor yet the brushes of the war.
Unarm thee, go; and doubt thou not brave boy,
I Will stand to day, for thee, and me, and Troy.

Brother, you have a vice of mercy in you;
Which better fits a Lion, then a man.

What vice is that? good Troylus chide me for it.


When many times the captive Grecian falls,
Even in the fan and wind of your fair Sword:
You bid them rise, and live.

O it is fair play.


Fools play, by heaven Hector.


How now? how now?


For the love of all the gods
Let Us leave the Hermit Pity with our Mothers;
And when we have our Armors buckled on,
The venomed vengeance ride upon our swords,
Spur them to ruthful work, reine them from ruth.

Fie savage, fie.


Hector, then it is wars.


Troylus, I would not have you fight to day.


Who should withold me?
Not fate, obedience, nor the hand of Mars,
Beckning with fiery trunchion my retire;
Not Priamus, and Hecuba on knees;
Their eyes ore-galled with recourse of tears;
Nor you my brother, with your true sword drawn
Opposed to hinder me, should stop my way:
But by my ruin.

Lay hold upon him Priam, hold him fast:
He is thy crutch; now if thou loose thy stay,
Thou on him leaning, and all Troy on thee,
Fall all together.

Come Hector, come, go back:
Thy wife has dreampt: thy mother has had visions;
Cassandra does foresee; and I my self,
Am like a Prophet suddenly en^apt, to tell thee that this day is ominous:
Therefore come back.

Aeneas is a field,
And I do stand engaged to many Greeks,
Even in the faith of valor, to appear
This morning to them.

I, but thou shall not go,


I must not break my faith:
You know me dutiful, therefore dear sir,
Let me not shame respect; but give me leave
To take that course by your consent and voice,
Which you do here forbid me, Royal Priam.

O Priam, yield not to him.


Do not dear father.


Andromache I am offended with you:
Upon the love you bear me, get you in.

This foolish, dreaming, superstitious girl,
Makes all these bodements.

O farewell, dear Hector:
Look how thou die; look how thy eye turns pale:
Look how thy wounds does bleed at many vents:
Hark how Troy roares; how Hecuba cries out;
How poor Andromache shrils her dolor forth;
Behold distraction, frenzy, and amazement,
Like witless Antickes one another meet,
And all cry Hector, Hectors dead: O Hector!

Away, away.


Farewell: yes, soft: Hector I take my leave;
Thou do thy self, and all our Troy deceive.

You are amazed, my Liege, at her exclaim:
Go in and cheer the Town, we will forth and fight:
Do deeds of praise, and tell you them at night.

Farewell: the gods with safety stand about thee.


They are at it, hark: proud Diomed, believe
I come to loose my arm, or win my sleeue.

Do you hear my Lord? do you hear?


What now?


Here Is a Letter come from yond poor girl.


Let me read.


A whoreson tisicke, a whoreson rascally tisicke, so troubles me; and the foolish
fortune of this girl, and what one thing, what another, that I shall leave you
one of th's days: and I have a rheum in mine eyes too; and such an ache in my
bones; that unless a man were cursed, I cannot tell what to think on it. What
says she there


Words, words, mere words, no matter from the heart;
The effect does operate another way.
Go wind to wind, there turn and change together:
My love with words and errors still she feeds;
But edifies another with her deeds.

Why, but hear you?


Hence brother lackie; ignomie and shame
Pursue thy life, and live aye with thy name.

Now they are clapper-clawing one another, I Will go look on: that dissembling
abominable varlet Diomede, has got that same scuruie, doting, foolish young
knaves Sleeue of Troy, there in his Helm: I would feign see them meet; that,
that same young Trojan ass, that loves the whore there, might send that
Greekish whore-maisterly villain, with the Sleeue, back to the dissembling
luxurious drabbe, of a sleeuelesse errant. OF the the other side, the policy of
those crafty swearing rascals; that stole old Mouse-eaten dry cheese, Nestor:
and that same dog-foxe Ulysses is not proved worth a Black-berry. They set me
up in policy, that mungrill curre Ajax, against that dog of as bad a kind,
Achilles. And now is the curre Ajax prouder then the curre Achilles, and will
not arm to day. Whereupon, the Grecians began to proclaim barbarism; and
policy grows into an ill opinion

Soft, here comes Sleeue, and the other.


Fly not: for should thou take the River Stix,
I would swim after.

Thou do miscall retire:
I do not fly; but aduantagious care
Withdrew me from the odds of multitude:
Have at thee?

Hold thy whore Grecian: now for thy whore Trojan: Now the Sleeue, now the
Sleeue


What art thou Greek? art thou for Hectors match?
Art thou of blood, and honor?

No, no: I am a rascal: a scuruie railing knave: a very filthy rogue.


I do believe thee, live.


God a mercy, that thou will believe me; but a plague break thy neck -- for
frighting me: what is become of the wenching rogues? I think they have
swallowed one another. I would laugh at that miracle -- yet in a sort, lechery
ears it self: I Will seek them


Go, go, my servant, take thou Troylus Horse;
Present the fair Steed to my Lady Cressid:
Fellow, commend my service to her beauty;
Tell her, I have chastis'd the amorous Troyan.
And am her Knight by proof.

I go my Lord.


Renew, renew, the fierce Polidamus
Has beat down Menon: bastard Margarelon
Has Doreus prisoner.
And stands Calossus-wise wauing his beam,
Upon the pashed courses of the Kings:
Epistropus and Cedus, Polixines is slain;
Amphimacus, and Thous deadly hurt;
Patroclus taken or slain, and Palamedes
Sore hurt and bruised; the dreadful Sagittary
Appauls our numbers, haste we Diomed
To re-enforcement, or we perish all.

Coe bear Patroclus body to Achilles,
And bid the snaile-pac'd Ajax arm for shame;
There is a thousand Hectors in the field:
Now here he fights on Galathe his Horse,
And there lacks work: ano^ he is there a foot,
And there they fly or dye, like scaled sculs,
Before the belching Whale; then is he yonder,
And there the straying Greeks, ripe for his edge,
Fall down before him, like the mowers swath;
Here, there, and every where, he leaves and takes;
Dexterity so obaying appetite,
That what he will, he does, and does so much,
That proof is called impossibility.

Oh, courage, courage Princes: great Achilles
Is arming, weeping, cursing, vowing vengeance;
Patroclus wounds have roused his drowzie blood,
Together with his mangled Myrmidons,
That noselesse, handlesse, hackt and chipt, come to him;
Crying on Hector. Ajax has lost a friend,
And foames at mouth, and he is armed, and at it:
Roaring for Troylus; who has done to day.
Mad and fantastic execution;
Engaging and redeeming of himself,
With such a careless force, and forcelesse care,
As if that luck in very spite of cunning, bad him win all.

Troylus, thou coward Troylus.


I, there, there.


So, so, we draw together.


Where is this Hector?
Come, come, thou boy-queller, show thy face:
Know what it is to meet Achilles angry.
Hector, where is Hector? I will none but Hector.

Troylus, thou coward Troylus, show thy head.


Troylus, I say, where is Troylus?


What would thou?


I would correct him.


Were I the General,
Thou should have my office,
Ere that correction: Troylus I say, what Troylus?

Oh traitor Diomed!
Turn thy false face thou traitor,
And pay thy life thou owe me for my horse.

Ha, art thou there?


I Will fight with him alone, stand Diomed.


He is my prize, I will not look upon.


Come both you coging Greeks, have at you both.


Yea Troylus? O well fought my youngest Brother.


Now do I see thee; have at thee Hector.


Pause if thou will.


I do disdain thy courtesy, proud Trojan;
Be happy that my arms are out of use:
My rest and negligence befriends thee now,
But thou anon shall hear of me again:
Till when, go seek thy fortune.

Fare thee well:
I would have been much more a fresher man,
Had I expected thee: how now my Brother?

Ajax has taken Aeneas; shall it be?
No, by the flame of yonder glorious heaven,
He shall not carry him: I Will be taken too,
Or bring him off: Fate hear me what I say;
I wreake nor, though thou end my life to day.

Stand, stand, thou Greek,
Thou art a goodly mark:
No? will thou not? I like thy armor well,
I Will frush it, and unlock the riuets all,
But I Will be master of it: will thou not beast abide?
Why then fly on, I Will hunt thee for thy hide.

Come here about me you my Myrmidons:
Mark what I say; attend me where I wheel:
Strike not a stroke, but keep your selves in breath;
And when I have the bloody Hector found,
Empale him with your weapons round about:
In fellest manner execute your arm.
Follow me sirs, and my proceedings eye;
It is decreed, Hector the great must dye.

The Cuckold and the Cuckold maker are at it: now bull, now dog, low; Paris
low; now my double hen'd sparrow; low Paris, low; the bull has the game:
ware horns ho


Turn slave and fight.


What art thou?


A Bastard Son of Priams.


I am a Bastard too, I love Bastards, I am a Bastard begot, Bastard instructed,
Bastard in mind, Bastard in valor, in every thing illegitimate: one Bear
will not bite another, and wherefore should one Bastard? take heed, the
quarrel's most ominous to us: if the Son of a whore fight for a whore, he
tempts judgment: farewell Bastard


The devil take thee coward.


Most putrified core so fair without:
Thy goodly armor thus has cost thy life.
Now is my days work done; I Will take good breath:
Rest Sword, thou have thy fill of blood and death.

Look Hector how the Sun begins to set;
How ugly night comes breathing at his heels,
Even with the veil and darking of the Sun.
To close the day up, Hectors life is done.

I am unarmed, forgo this vantage Greek.


Strike fellows, strike, this is the man I seek.
So Illion fall thou: now Troy sink down;
Here lies thy heart, thy sinews, and thy bone.
On Myrmidons, cry you all a maine,
Achilles has the mighty Hector slain.
Hark, a retreat upon our Grecian part.

The Trojan Trumpets sounds the like my Lord.


The dragon wing of night ore-spreds the earth
And stickler-like the Armies seperates
My half supt Sword, that frankly would have fed,
Pleased with this dainty bed; thus goes to bed.
Come, tie his body to my horses tail;
Along the field, I will the Trojan traile.

Hark, hark, what shout is that?


Peace Drums.


Achilles, Achilles, Hector's slain, Achilles.


The brute is, Hector's slain, and by Achilles.


If it be so, yet braglesse let it be:
Great Hector was a man as good as he.

March patiently along; let one be sent
To pray Achilles see us at our Tent.
If in his death the gods have us befrended,
Great Troy is ours, and our sharp wars are ended.

Stand hoe, yet are we masters of the field,
Never go home; here starve we out the night.

Hector is slain.


Hector? the gods forbid.


He Is dead: and at the murderers Horses tail,
In beastly sort, dragged through the shameful Field*
Frown on you heavens, effect your rage with speed:
Sit gods upon your throanes, and smile at Troy.
I say at once, let your brief plagues be mercy,
And linger not our sure destructions on.

My Lord, you do discomfort all the Host.


You understand me not, that tell me so:
I do not speak of flight, of fear, of death,
But dare all imminence that gods and men,
Address their dangers in. Hector is gone:
Who shall tell Priam so? or Hecuba?
Let him that will a screechoule aye be called,
Go in to Troy, and say there, Hector's dead:
There is a word will Priam turn to stone;
Make wels, and Niobes of the maids and wives;
Cool statues of the youth: and in a word,
Scarre Troy out of it self. But march away,
Hector is dead: there is no more to say.
Stay yet: you vile abominable Tents,
Thus proudly pight upon our Phrygian plains:
Let Titan rise as early as he dare,
I Will through, and through you; and thou great sized coward:
No space of Earth shall sunder our two hates,
I Will haunt thee, like a wicked conscience still,
That mouldeth goblins swift as frensies thoughts.
Strike a free march to Troy, with comfort go:
Hope of revenge, shall hide our inward woe.

But hear you? hear you?


Hence broker, lackie, ^gnomy, and shame
Pursue thy life, and live aye with thy name.

A goodly medcine for mine aching bones: oh world, world, world! thus is the
poor agent disp^sde: Oh traitors and bawdes; how earnestly are you set
aworke, and how ill requited? why should our endeavor be so desired, and the
performance so loathed? What Verse for it? what instance for it? let me see

Full merrily the humble Bee-doth sing,
Till he has lost his honey, and his sting.
And being once subdued in armed tail,
Sweet honey, and sweet notes together fail.
Good traders in the flesh, set this in your painted clothes;
As many as be here of Panders hall,
Your eyes half out, weep out at Pandar's fall:
Or if you cannot weep, yet give some groans;
Though not for me yet for your aching bones:
Brethren and sisters of the hold-dore trade,
Some two months hence, my will shall here be made:
It should be now, but that my fear is this:
Some galled Goose of Winchester would hiss:
Till then, I Will sweat, and seek about for eases;
And at that time be queath you my diseases.


