IF Music be the food of Love, play on,
Give me excess of it: that surfeiting,
The appetite may sicken, and so dye.
That strain again, it had a dying fall:
O, it came ore my ear, like the sweet sound
That breathes upon a bank of Violets;
Stealing, and giving Odor. Enough, no more,
It Is not so sweet now, as it was before.
O spirit of Love, how quick and fresh art thou,
That notwithstanding thy capacity,
Receives as the Sea. Naught enters there,
Of what validity, and pitch so ere,
But falls into abatement, and low price
Even in a minute; so full of shapes is fancy,
That it alone, is high fantastical.

Will you go hunt my Lord?


What Curio?


The Heart.


Why so I do, the Noblest that I have:
O when mine eyes did see Oliuia first,
Me thought she purged the air of pestilence;
That instant was I turned into a Heart,
And my desires like fell and cruel hounds,
Ere since pursue me. How now what news from her?

So please my Lord, I might not be admitted,
But from her handmaid do return this answer:
The Element it self, till seven years heat,
Shall not behold her face at ample view:
But like a Cloystresse she will veiled walk,
And water once a day her Chamber round
With eye-offending brine: all this to season
A brothers dead love, which she would keep fresh
And lasting, in her sad remembrance.

O she that has a heart of that fine frame
To pay this debt of love but to a brother,
How will she love, when the rich golden shaft
Has killed the flock of all affections else
That live in her. When Liver, Brain, and Heart,
These sovereign thrones, are all supplied and filled
Her sweet perfections with one self king:
Away before me, to sweet beds of Flowers,
Loue-thoughts lie rich, when canopy'd with bowres.

What Country (Friends) is this?


This is Illyria Lady.


And what should I do in Illyria?
My brother he is in Elysium,
Perchance he is not drowned: What think you saylors?

It is perchance that you your self were saved.


O my poor brother, and so perchance may he be.


True Madam, and to comfort you with chance,
Assure your self, after our ship did split,
When you, and those poor number saved with you,
Hung on our driving boat: I saw your brother
Most provident in peril, bind himself,
(Courage and hope both teaching him the practice)
To a strong Maste, that lived upon the sea:
Where like Orion on the Dolphines back,
I saw him hold acquaintance with the waves,
So long as I could see.

For saying so, there is Gold:
Mine own escape unfolds to my hope,
Whereto thy speech serves for authority
The like of him. Know thou this Country?

I Madam well, for I was bred and borne
Not three hours travail from this very place:

Who gouernes here?


A noble Duke in nature, as in name.


What is his name?


Orsino.


Orsino: I have heard my father name him.
He was a Batchellor then.

And so is now, or was so very late:
For but a month ago I went from hence,
And then 'twas fresh in murmr (as you know
What great ones do, the less will prattle of,)
That he did seek the love of fair Oliuia.

What Is she?


A virtuous maid, the daughter of a Count
That did some tweluemonth since, then leaving her
In the protection of his son, her brother,
Who shortly also did: for whose dear love
(They say) she has abiur'd the sight
And company of men.

O that I served that Lady,
And might not be delivered to the world
Till I had made mine own occasion mellow
What my estate is.

That were hard to compass,
Because she will admit no kind of suite,
No not the Dukes.

There is a fair behavior in thee Captain,
And though that nature, with a beauteous wall
Does often close in pollution: yet of thee
I will believe thou have a mind that suites
With this thy fair and outward charracter.
I prithee (and I Will pay thee bounteously)
Conceal me what I am, and be my aid,
For such disguise as happily shall become
The form of my intent. I Will serve this Duke,
Thou shall present me as an Eunuch to him,
It may be worth thy pains: for I can sing,
And speak to him in many sorts of Music,
That will allow me very worth his service.
What else may hap, to time I will commit,
Only shape thou thy silence to my wit.

Be you his Eunuch, and your Mute I Will be,
When my tongue blabs, then let mine eyes not see.

I thank thee: Lead me on.


What a plague means my Niece to take the death of her brother thus? I am sure
care's an enemy to life


By my troth sir Toby, you must come in earlyer a nights* your Cousin, my Lady,
takes great exceptions to your ill hours


Why let her except, before excepted.


I, but you must confine your self within the modest limits of order.


Confine? I Will confine my self no finer then I am: these clothes are good
enough to drink in, and so be these boots too: and they be not, let them hang
themselves in their own straps


That quaffing and drinking will undo you: I heard my Lady talk of it
yesterday: and of a foolish knight that you brought in one night here, to be
her woe


Who, Sir Andrew Ague-cheeke?


I he.


He Is as tall a man as any's in Illyria.


What Is that to the purpose?


Why he has three thousand ducates a year.


I, but he will have but a year in all these ducates: He Is a very fool, and a
prodigal


Fie, that you will say so: he plays of th Viol-de-ga^-boys, and speaks three or
four languages word for word without book, and has all the good gifts of
nature


He has indeed, almost natural: for besides that he is a fool, he is a great
quarreller: and but that he has the gift of a Coward, to allay the gust he
has in quarrelling, it is thought among the prudent, he would quickly have the
gift of a grave


By this hand they are scoundrels and substractor* that say so of him. Who are
they


They that add moreour, he is drunk nightly in your company.


With drinking healths to my Niece: I Will drink to her as long as there is a
passage in my throat, and drink in Illyria: he is a Coward and a Coystrill that
will not drink to my Niece* till his brains turn of th toe, like a parish
top. What wench? Castiliano vulgo: for here coms Sir Andrew Agueface


Sir Toby Belch. How now sir Toby Belch?


Sweet sir Andrew.


Bless you fair Shrew.


And you too sir.


Accost Sir Andrew, accost.


What Is that?


My Neeces Chambermaid.


Good Mistress accost, I desire better acquaintance


My name is Mary sir.


Good mistress Mary, accost.


You mistake knight: Accost, is front her, board her, woe her, assail her.


By my troth I would not undertake her in this company. Is that the meaning of
Accost


Far you well Gentlemen.


And thou let part so Sir Andrew, would thou might never draw sword again.


And you part so mistress, I would I might never draw sword again: Fair Lady,
do you think you have fools in hand


Sir, I have not you by 'th hand.


Marry but you shall have, and heeres my hand.


Now sir* thought is free: I pray you bring your hand to 'th Buttry bar, and
let it drink


Wherefore (sweetheart?) What Is your Metaphor?


It Is dry sir.


Why I think so: I am not such an ass, but I can keep my hand dry. But
what is your jest


A dry jest Sir.


Are you full of them?


I Sir, I have them at my fingers ends: marry now I let go your hand, I am
barren


O knight, thou lack'st a cup of Canarie: when did I see thee so put down?


Never in your life I think, unless you see Canarie put me down: me thinks
sometimes I have no more wit then a Christian, or an ordinary man has: but I
am a great eater of beef, and I believe that does harm to my wit


No question.


And I thought that, I Would forswear it. I Will ride home to morrow sir Toby.


Pur-quoy my dear knight?


What is purquoy? Do, or not do? I would I had bestowed that time in the
tongues, that I have in fencing dancing, and beare-bayting; O had I but
followed the Arts


Then had thou had an excellent head of hair.


Why, would that have mended my hair?


Past question, for thou see it will not cool my nature


But it becoms we well enough, do not?


Excellent, it hangs like flax on a distaffe: and I hope to see a huswife take
thee between her legs, and spin it off


Faith I Will home to morrow sir Toby, your niece will not be seen, or if she be
it is four to one, she will none of me: the Count himself here hard by, wooes her


She Will none of th Count, she will not match above her degree, neither in estate,
years, nor wit: I have heard her swear't. Tut there is life in it man


I Will stay a month longer. I am a fellow of th strangest mind in th world: I
delight in Maskes and Revels sometimes altogether


Art thou good at these kicke-chawses Knight?


As any man in Illyria, whatsoever he be, under the degree of my betters, and
yet I will not compare with an old man


What is thy excellence in a galliard, knight?


Faith, I can cut a caper.


And I can cut the Mutton to it.


And I think I have the backe-tricke, simply as strong as any man in Illyria.


Wherefore are these things hid? Wherefore have these gifts a Curtain before
'em? Are they like to take dust, like mistress Mals picture? Why do thou not
go to Church in a Galliard, and come home in a Carranto? My very walk should
be a Iigge: I would not so much as make water but in a Sinke-a-pace: What
dooest thou mean? Is it a world to hide virtues in? I did think by the
excellent constitution of thy leg, it was formed under the star of a
Galliard


I, it is strong, and it does indifferent well in a damned colored stock. Shall
we sit about some Revels


What shall we do else: were we not borne under Taurus?


Taurus? That sides and heart.


No sir, it is legs and thighs: let me see thee caper. Ha, higher: ha, ha,
excellent


If the Duke continue these favors toward you Cesario, you are like to be
much advanced, he has known you but three days, and already you are no
stranger


You either fear his humor, or my negligence, that you call in question the
continuance of his love. Is he inconstant sir, in his favors


No believe me.


I thank you: here comes the Count.


Who saw Cesario hoa?


On your attendance my Lord here.


Stand you awhile aloof. Cesario,
Thou know no less, but all: I have vnclasp'd
To thee the book even of my secret soul.
Therefore good youth, address thy gate unto her,
Be not deni'de access, stand at her doors,
And tell them, there thy fixed foot shall grow
Till thou have audience.

Sure my Noble Lord,
If she be so abandoned to her sorrow
As it is spoke, she never will admit me.

Be clamorous, and leap all civil bounds,
Rather then make vnprofited return,

Say I do speak with her (my Lord) what then?


O then, unfold the passion of my love,
Surprise her with discourse of my dear faith;
It shall become thee well to act my woes:
She will attend it better in thy youth,
Then in a Nuntio's of more grave aspect.

I think not so, my Lord.


Dear Lad, believe it;
For they shall yet belie thy happy years,
That say thou art a man: Dianas lip
Is not more smooth, and rubious: thy small pipe
Is as the maidens organ, shrill, and sound,
And all is semblatiue a woman's part.
I know thy constellation is right apt
For this affayre: some four or five attend him,
All if you will: for I my self am best
When least in company: prosper well in this,
And thou shall live as freely as thy Lord,
To call his fortunes thine.

I Will do my best
To woe your Lady: yet a barrefull strife,
Who ere I woe, my self would be his wife.

Nay, either tell me where thou have bin, or I will not open my lips so wide
as a brissle may enter, in way of thy excuse: my Lady will hang thee for thy
absence


Let her hang me: he that is well hang'de in this world, needs to fear no
colors


Make that good.


He shall see none to fear.


A good lenton answer: I can tell thee where yt saying was borne, of I fear no
colors


Where good mistress Mary?


In the wars, and that may you be bold to say in your foolerie.


Well, God give them wisdom that have it: and those that are fools, let them
use their talents


Yet you will be hanged for being so long absent, or to be turned away: is not
that as good as a hanging to you


Many a good hanging, preuents a bad marriage: and for turning away, let summer
bear it out


You are resolute then?


Not so neither, but I am resolved on two points


That if one break, the other will hold: or if both break, your gaskins fall.


Apt in good faith, very apt: well go thy way, if sir Toby would leave
drinking, thou were as witty a piece of Eues flesh, as any in Illyria


Peace you rogue, no more of that: here comes my Lady: make your excuse wisely,
you were best


Wit, and't be thy will, put me into good fooling: those wits that think they
have thee, do very often prove fools: and I that am sure I Jack thee, may
pass for a wise man. For what says Quinapalus, Better a witty fool, then a
foolish wit. God bless thee Lady


Take the fool away.


Do you not hear fellows, take away the Lady.


Go too, y' are a dry fool: I Will no more of you: besides you grow dis-honest.


Two faults Madona, that drink and good counsel will amend: for give the dry
fool drink, then is the fool not dry: bid the dishonest man mend himself, if
he mend, he is no longer dishonest; if he cannot, let the Botcher mend him:
any thing that is mended, is but patched: virtue that transgresses, is but patcht
with sin, and sin that amends, is but patcht with virtue. If that this simple
Sillogisme will serve, so: if it will not, what remedy? As there is no true
Cuckold but calamity, so beauties a flower; The Lady bad take away the fool,
therefore I say again, take her away


Sir, I bad them take away you.


Misprision in the highest degree. Lady, Cucullus non facit monachum: that is as
much to say, as I wear not motley in my brain: good Madona, give me leave to
prove you a fool


Can you do it?


Dexteriously, good Madona.


Make your proof.


I must catechize you for it Madona, Good my Mouse of virtue answer me.


Well sir, for want of other idleness, I Will bide your proof.


Good Madona, why mournst thou?


Good fool, for my brothers death.


I think his soul is in hell, Madona.


I know his soul is in heaven, fool.


The more fool (Madona) to mourn for your Brothers soul, being in heaven.
Take away the Fool, Gentlemen


What think you of this fool Maluolio, does he not mend?


Yes, and shall do, till the pangs of death shake him: Infirmity that decaies
the wise, does ever make the better fool


God send you sir, a speedy Infirmity, for the better increasing your folly:
Sir Toby will be sworn that I am no Fox, but he will not pass his word for two
pence that you are no Fool


How say you to that Maluolio?


I marvel your Ladyship takes delight in such a barren rascal: I saw him put
down the other day, with an ordinary fool, that has no more brain then a
stone. Look you now, he is out of his guard already: unless you laugh and
minister occasion to him, he is gagged. I protest I take these Wisemen, that
crow so at these set kind of fools, no better then the fools Zanies


O you are ficke of self-love Maluolio, and taste with a distempered appetite.
To be generous, guitlesse, and of free disposition, is to take those things for
Bird-bolts, that you deem Cannon bullets: There is no slander in an allowed
fool, though he do nothing but rail; nor no railing, in a known discreet
man, though he do nothing but reprove


Now Mercury indue thee with leasing, for thou speak well of fools.


Madam, there is at the gate, a young Gentleman, much desires to speak with
you


From the Count Orsino, is it?


I know not (Madam) it is a fair young man, and well attended.


Who of my people hold him in delay*


Sir Toby Madam, your kinsman.


Fetch him off I pray you, he speaks nothing but madman: Fie on him. Go you
Maluolio; If it be a^ suit from the Count, I am sick, or not at home. What you
will, to dismiss it

Now you see sir, how your fooling grows old, and people dislike it.


Thou have spoke for us (Madona) as if thy eldest son should be a fool:
whose scull, Jove cramme with brains, for here he comes

One of thy kin has a most weak Pia-mater.


By mine honor half drunk. What is he at the gate Cousin?


A Gentleman.


A Gentleman? What Gentleman?


It Is a Gentleman here. A plague of these pickle herring: How now Sot.


Good Sir Toby.


Cousin, Cousin, how have you come so early by this Lethargy?


Letcherie, I defy Letchery: there is one at the gate.


I marry, what is he?


Let him be the devil and he will, I care not: give me faith say I. Well, it is
all one


What Is a drunken man like, fool?


Like a drowned man, a fool, and a mad man:
One draught above heat, makes him a fool, the second maddes him, and a third
drownes him

Go thou and seek the Crowner, and let him sit of my Coz: for he is in the
third degree of drink: he is drowned: go look after him


He is but mad yet Madona, and the fool shall look to the madman.


Madam, yond young fellow swears he will speak with you. I told him you were
sick, he takes on him to understand so much, and therefore comes to speak with
you. I told him you were asleep, he seems to have a fore knowledge of that
too, and therefore comes to speak with you. What is to be said to him Lady,
he is fortified against any denial


Tell him, he shall not speak with me.


Has been told so: and he says he will stand at your door like a Sheriffs
post, and be the supporter to a bench, but he will speak with you


What kind of man is he?


Why of mankind.


What manner of man?


Of very ill manner: he will speak with you, will you, or no.


Of what personage, and years is he?


Not yet old enough for a man, nor young enough for a boy: as a squash is before
it is a pescod, or a Codling when it is almost an Apple: It Is with him in standing
water, between boy and man. He is very well-fauour'd, and he speaks very
shrewishly: One would think his mothers milk were scarce out of him


Let him approach: Call in my Gentlewoman.


Gentlewoman, my Lady calls.


Give me my veil: come throw it ore my face,
We Will once more hear Orsinos Embassy.

The honorable Lady of the house, which is she?


Speak to me, I shall answer for her: your will.


Most radiant, exquisite, and unmatchable beauty. I pray you tell me if this
be the Lady of the house, for I never saw her. I would be loath to cast away
my speech: for besides that it is excellently well pend, I have taken great
pains to con it. Good Beauties, let me sustain no scorn; I am very
comptible, even to the least sinister usage


Whence came you sir?


I can say little more then I have studied, and that question's out of my part.
Good gentle one, give me modest assurance, if you be the Lady of the house,
that may proceed in my speech


Are you a Comedian?


No my profound heart: and yet (by the very phangs of malice, I swear) I am
not that I play. Are you the Lady of the house


If I do not usurp my self, I am.


Most certain, if you are she, you do vsurp your self: for what is yours to
bestow, is, not yours to reserve. But this is from my Commission: I will on
with my speech in your praise, and then show you the heart of my message


Come to what is important in it: I forgive you the praise.


Alas, I took great pains to study it, and it is Poetical.


It is the more like to be feigned, I pray you keep it in. I heard you were
saucy at my gates, and allowd your approach rather to wonder at you, then to
hear you. If you be not mad, be gone: if you have reason, be brief: it is not
that time of Moon with me, to make one in so skipping a dialogue


Will you hoyst sail sir, here lies your way.


No good swabber, I am to hull here a little longer. Some mollification for
your Giant, sweet Lady; tell me your mind, I am a messenger


Sure you have some hiddeous matter to deliver, when the courtesy of it is so
fearful. Speak your office


It alone concerns your ear: I bring no ouerture of war, no taxation of
homage; I hold the Olyffe in my hand: my words are as full of peace, as matter


Yet you began rudely. What are you? What would you?


The rudeness that has appeared in me, have I learned from my entertainment.
What I am, and what I would, are as secret as maidenhead: to your ears,
Divinity; to any others, profanation


Give us the place alone,
We will hear this divinity. Now sir, what is your text?

Most sweet Lady.


A comfortable doctrine, and much may be said of it. Where lies your Text?


In Orsinoes bosom.


In his bosom? In what chapter of his bosom?


To answer by the method in the first of his heart.


O, I have read it: it is heresy. Have you no more to say?


Good Madam, let me see your face.


Have you any Commission from your Lord, to negotiate with my face: you are now
out of your Text: but we will draw the Curtain, and show you the picture. Look
you sir, such a one I was this present: Is It not well done


Excellently done, if God did all.


It Is in grain sir, 'twill endure wind and weather.


It Is beauty truly blent, whose red and white,
Natures own sweet, and cunning hand laid on:
Lady, you are the cruell'st she alive,
If you will lead these graces to the grave,
And leave the world no copy.

O sir, I will not be so hard-hearted: I will give out diverse scedules of my
beauty. It shall be Inuentoried and every particle and vtensile labell'd to my
will: As, Item two lips indifferent read, Item two gray eyes, with lids to
them: Item, one neck, one chin, and so forth. Were you sent hither to praise
me


I see you what you are, you are too proud:
But if you were the devil, you are fair:
My Lord, and master loves you: O such love
Could be but recompensed, though you were crowned
The non-pareil of beauty.

How does he love me?


With adorations, fertile tears,
With groans that thunder love, with sighs of fire.

Your Lord does know my mind, I cannot love him
Yet I suppose him virtuous, know him noble,
Of great estate, of fresh and stainlesse youth;
In voices well divulged, free, learned, and valiant,
And in dimension, and the shape of nature,
A gracious person; But yet I cannot love him:
He might have took his answer long ago.

If I did love you in my masters flame,
With such a suffering, such a deadly life:
In your denial, I would find no sense,
I would not understand it.

Why, what would you?


Make me a willow Cabine at your gate,
And call upon my soul within the house,
Write loyal Cantons of contemned love,
And sing them loud even in the dead of night:
Hallow your name to the reuerberate hills,
And make the babbling Gossip of the air,
Cry out Oliuia: O you should not rest
Between the elements of air, and earth,
But you should pity me.

You might do much:
What is your Parentage?

Above my fortunes, yet my state is well:
I am a Gentleman.

Get you to your Lord:
I cannot love him: let him send no more,
Unless (perchance) you come to me again,
To tell me how he takes it: Fare you well:
I thank you for your pains: spend this for me.

I am no feed poast, Lady; keep your purse,
My Master, not my self, lackes recompense.
Love make his heart of flint, that you shall love,
And let your fervor like my masters be,
Placed in contempt: Farewell fair cruelty.

What is your Parentage?
Above my fortunes, yet my state is well;
I am a Gentleman. I Will be sworn thou art,
Thy tongue, thy face, thy limbs, actions, and spirit.
Do give thee fiue-fold blazon: not too fast: soft, soft,
Unless the Master were the man. How now?
Even so quickly may one catch the plague?
Me thinks I feel this youths perfections
With an invisible, and subtle stealth
To creep in at mine eyes. Well, let it be.
What hoa, Maluolio.

Here Madam, at your service.


Run after that same peevish Messenger
The Countes man: he left this Ring behind him
Would I, or not: tell him, I Will none of it.
Desire him not to flatter with his Lord,
Nor hold him up with hopes, I am not for him:
If that the youth will come this way to morrow,
I Will give him reasons for it: hie thee Maluolio.

Madam, I will.


I do I know not what, and fear to find
Mine eye too great a flatterer for my mind:
Fate, show thy force, our selves we do not owe,
What is decreed, must be: and be this so.

Will you stay no longer: nor will you not that I go with you.


By your patience, no: my stars shine darkely over me; the malignancie of my
fate, might perhaps distemper yours; therefore I shall crave of you your leave,
that I may bear my evils alone. It were a bad recompense for your love, to lay
any of them on you


Let me yet know of you, whither you are bound.


No sooth sir: my determinate voyage is mere extrauagancie. But I perceive in
you so excellent a touch of modesty, that you will not extort from me, what I
am willing to keep in: therefore it charges me in manners, the rather to
express my self: you must know of me then Antonio, my name is Sebastian
(which I called Rodorigo) my father was that Sebastian of Messaline, whom I
know you have heard of. He left behind him, my self, and a sister, both borne
in an hour: if the Heavens had been pleased, would we had so ended. But you
sir, altered that, for some hour before you took me from the breach of the
sea, was my sister drowned


Alas the day.


A Lady sir, though it was said she much resembled me, was yet of many
accounted beautiful: but ^hogh I could not with such estimable wonder
ouer-farre believe that, yet thus far I will boldly publish her, she bore a
mind that envy could not but call fair: She is drowned already sir with salt
water, though I seem to drown her remembrance again with more


Pardon me sir, your bad entertainment.


O good Antonio, forgive me your trouble.


If you will not murder me for my love, let me be your servant.


If you will not undo what you have done, that is kill him, whom you have
recouer'd, desire it not. Fare ye well at once, my bosom is full of kindness,
and I am yet so near the manners of my mother, that upon the least occasion
more, mine eyes will tell tales of me: I am bound to the Count Orsino's Court,
farewell


The gentleness of all the gods go with thee:
I have many enemies in Orsino's Court,
Else would I very shortly see thee there:
But come what may, I do adore thee so,
That danger shall seem sport, and I will go.

Were not you even now, with the Countess Oliuia?


Even now sir, on a moderate pace, I have since ariu'd but hither.


She returns this Ring to you (sir) you might have saved me my pains, to
have taken it away your self. She adds moreover, that you should put your Lord
into a desperate assurance, she will none of him. And one thing more, that you
be never so hardy: o come again in his affairs, unless it be to report
your Lords taking of this: receive it so


She took the Ring of me, I Will none of it.


Come sir, you peeuishly threw it to her: and her will is, it should be so
returned: If it be worth stooping for, there it lies, in your eye: if not, be
it his that finds it


I left no Ring with her: what means this Lady?
Fortune forbid my outside have not charmed her:
She made good view of me, indeed so much,
That me thought her eyes had lost her tongue,
For she did speak in starts distractedly.
She loves me sure, the cunning of her passion
Inuites me in this churlish messenger:
None of my Lords Ring? Why he sent her none;
I am the man, if it be so, as it is,
Poor Lady, she were better love a dream:
Disguise, I see thou art a wickedness,
Wherein the pregnant enemy does much.
How easy is it, for the proper false
In women's waxen hearts to set their forms:
Alas, O frailty is the cause, not we,
For such as we are made, if such we be:
How will this fadge? My master loves her dearly,
And I (poor monster) fond as much on him:
And she (mistaken) seems to dote on me:
What will become of this? As I am man,
My state is desperate for my masters love:
As I am woman (now alas the day)
What thriftlesse sighs shall poor Oliuia breath?
O time, thou must vntangle this, not I,
It is too hard a knot for me t'vnty.

Approach Sir Andrew: not to be a bed after midnight, is to be up betimes,
and Deliculo surgere, thou know


Nay by my troth I know not: but I know, to be up late, is to be up late.


A false conclusion: I hate it as an vnfill'd Can. To be up after midnight,
and to go to bed then is early: so that to go to bed after midnight, is to go
to bed betimes. Does not our lives consist of the four Elements


Faith so they say, but I think it rather consists of eating and drinking.


The art a scholar; let us therefore eat and drink Marian I say, a stoop of
wine


Here comes the fool in faith.


How now my hearts: Did you never see the Picture of we three?


Welcome ass, now let us have a catch.


By my troth the fool has an excellent breast. I had rather then forty
shillings I had such a leg, and so sweet a breath to sing, as the fool has.
Insooth thou wast in very gracious fooling last night, when thou spok'st of
Pigrogromitus, of the Vapians passing the Equinoctial of Queubus: 'twas very
good in faith: I sent thee six pence for thy Lemon, had it


I did impeticos thy gratillity: for Maluolios nose is no Whip-stocke. My Lady
has a white hand, and the Mermidons are no bottle-ale houses


Excellent: Why this is the best fooling, when all is done. Now a song.


Come on, there is six pence for you. Let Us have a song.


There Is a testrill of me too: if one knight give a


Would you have a loue-song, or a song of good life?


A love song, a love song.


I, I. I care not for good life.

O Mistress mine where are you roming?
O stay and hear, your true loves coming,
That can sing both high and low.
Trip no further pretty sweeting.
Iourneys end in lovers meeting,
Every wise man's son does know.

Excellent good, in faith.


Good, good.


What is love, it is not hereafter,
Present mirth, has present laughter:
What Is to come, is still unsure.
In delay there lies no plenty,
Then come kiss me sweet and twenty:
Youths a stuff will not endure.

A mellifluous voice, as I am true knight.


A contagious breath.


Very sweet, and contagious in faith.


To hear by the nose, it is dulcet in contagion. But shall we make the Welkin
dance indeed? Shall we rowze the night-Owle in a Catch, that will draw three
souls out of one Weauer? Shall we do that


And you love me, let us do it: I am dog at a Catch.


Byrlady sir, and some dogs will catch well.


Most certain: Let our Catch be, Thou Knave.


Hold thy peace, thou Knave knight. I shall be constrained in it, to call thee
knave, Knight


It Is not the first time I have constrained one to call me knave. Begin fool:
it begins, Hold thy peace


I shall never begin if I hold my peace.


Good in faith: Come begin.


What a catterwalling do you keep here? If my Lady have not called up her
Steward Maluolio, and bid him turn you out of doors, never trust me


My Lady's a Catayan, we are politicians, Maluolios a Peg-a-ramsie, and Three
merry men be we. Am not I consanguinious? Am I not of her blood: tilly valley.
Lady, There dwelt a man in Babylon, Lady, Lady


Beshrew me, the knights in admirable fooling.


I, he does well enough if he be disposed, and so do I too: he does it with a
better grace, but I do it more natural


O the twelfe day of December.


For the love of God peace.


My masters are you mad? Or what are you? Have you no wit, manners, nor
honesty, but to gabble like Tinkers at this time of night? Do ye make an
Alehouse of my Ladies house, that ye squeak out your Coziers Catches without
any mitigation or remorse of voice? Is there no respect of place, persons, nor
time in you


We did keep time sir in our Catches. Snecke up.


Sir Toby, I must be round with you. My Lady bad me tell you, that though she
harbors you as her kinsman, she is nothing allied to your disorders. If you can
separate your self and your misdemeanors, you are welcome to the house: if
not, and it would please you to take leave of her, she is very willing to bid
you farewell


Farewell dear heart, since I must needs be gone.


Nay good Sir Toby.


His eyes do show his days are almost done.


Is It even so?


But I will never dye.


Sir Toby there you lie.


This is much credit to you.


Shall I bid him go.


What and if you do?


Shall I bid him go, and spare not?


O no, no, no, no, you dare not.


Out of tune sir, ye lie: Art any more then a Steward? Do thou think because
thou art virtuous, there shall be no more Cakes and Ale


Yes by S. Anne, and Ginger shall be hot y' th mouth too.


The art in th right. Go sir, rub your Chain with crumbs. A stope of Wine
Maria


Mistress Mary, if you prized my Ladies savor at any thing more then contempt,
you would not give means for this uncivil rule; the shall know of it by this
hand


Go shake your ears.


'Twere as good a deed as to drink when a man's a hungry, to challenge him the
field, and then to break promise with him, and make a fool of him


Do It knight, I Will write thee a Challenge: or I Will deliver thy indignation to
him by word of mouth


Sweet Sir Toby be patient for to night: Since the youth of the Counts was to
day with my Lady, she is much out of quiet. For Monsieur Maluolio, let me alone
with him: If I do not gull him into an ayword, and make him a common
recreation, do not think I have wit enough to lie straight in my bed: I know
I can do it


Possess us, possess us, tell us something of him.


Marry sir, sometimes he is a kind of Puritan.


O, if I thought that, I Would beat him like a dog.


What for being a Puritan, thy exquisite reason, dear knight.


I have no exquisite reason for it, but I have reason good enough.


The diu'll a Puritan that he is, or any thing constantly but a time-pleaser,
an affection'd Ass, that cons State without book, and vtters it by great
swarths. The best persuaded of himself: so crammed (as he thinks) with
excellencies, that it is his grounds of faith, that all that look on him, love
him: and on that vice in him, will my revenge find notable cause to work


What will thou do?


I will drop in his way some obscure Epistles of love, wherein by the color of
his beard, the shape of his leg, the manner of his gate, the expressure of
his eye, forehead, and complexion, he shall find himself most feelingly
personated. I can write very like my Lady your Niece, on a forgotten matter
we can hardly make distinction of our hands


Excellent, I smell a device.


I hau't in my nose too.


He shall think by the Letters that thou will drop that they come from my
Niece, and that she is in love with him


My purpose is indeed a horse of that color.


And your horse now would make him an Ass.


Ass, I doubt not.


O twill be admirable.


Sport royal I warrant you: I know my Physic will work with him, I will
plant you two, and let the Fool make a third, where he shall find the Letter:
observe his construction of it: For this night to bed, and dream on the event:
Farewell


Good night Penthisilea.


Before me she is a good wench.


She Is a beagle true bred, and one that adores me: what of that?


I was adored once too.


Let Us to bed knight: Thou had need send for more money.


If I cannot recover your Niece, I am a foul way out.


Send for money knight, if thou have her not in th end, call me Cut.


If I do not, never trust me, take it how you will.


Come, come, I Will go burn some Sack, it is too late to go to bed now: Come
knight, come knight


Give me some Music; Now good morrow friends.
Now good Cesario, but that piece of song,
That old and Anticke song we heard last night;
Me thought it did relieve my passion much,
More then light airs, and recollected terms
Of these most brisk and giddy-paced times.
Come, but one verse.

He is not here (so please your Lordshippe) that should sing it?


Who was it?


Fest^ the lester my Lord, a fool that the Lady Oliuiaes Father took much
delight in. He is about the house


Seek him out, and play the tune the while.

Come hither Boy, if ever thou shall love
In the sweet pangs of it, remember me:
For such as I am, all true Lovers are,
Unstaid and skittish in all motions else,
Save in the constant image of the creature
That is beloved. How do thou like this tune?

It gives a very echo to the seat
Where love is thron^d.

Thou do speak masterly,
My life upon it, young though thou art, thine eye
Has staid upon some favor that it loves:
Has it not boy?

A little, by your favor.


What kind of woman is it?


Of your complexion.


She is not worth thee then. What years in faith?


About your years my Lord.


Too old by heaven: Let still the woman take
An elder then her self, so wears she to him;
So swayes she level in her husbands heart:
For boy, howeuer we do praise our seiues,
Our fancies are more giddie and vnfirme,
More longing, wavering, sooner lost and worn,
Then women's are.

I think it well my Lord.


Then let thy Love be younger then thy self,
Or thy affection cannot hold the bent:
For women are as Roses, whose fair flower
Being once displaid, does fall that very hour.

And so they are: alas, that they are so:
To die, even when they to perfection grow.

O fellow come, the song we had last night:
Mark it Cesario, it is old and plain;
The Spinsters and the Knitters in the Sun,
And the free maids that weaue their thread with bones,
Do use to chaunt it: it is silly sooth,
And dallies with the innocence of love,
Like the old age.

Are you ready Sir?


I prithee sing.


Come away, come away death,
And in sad cypress let me be laid.
Fie away, fie away breath,
I am slain by a fair cruel maid:
My shroud of white, stuck all with Ew, O prepare it.
My part of death no one so true did share it.
Not a flower, not a flower sweet
On my black coffin, let there be strewne:
Not a friend, not a friend greet
My poor corpse, where my bones shall be thrown:
A thousand thousand sighs to save, lay me o where
Sad true lover never find my grave, to weep there.

There Is for thy pains.


No pains sir, I take pleasure in singing sir.


I Will pay thy pleasure then.


Truly sir, and pleasure will be paid one time, or another.


Give me now leave, to leave thee.


Now the melancholy God protect thee, and the Tailor make thy doublet of
changeable Taffata, for thy mind is a very Opall. I would have men of such
constancy put to Sea, that their business might be every thing, and their
intent every where, for that is it, that always makes a good voyage of
nothing. Farewell


Let all the rest give place: Once more Cesario,
Get thee to yond same sovereign cruelty:
Tell her my love, more noble then the world
Prizes not quantity of dirtie lands,
The parts that fortune has bestowed upon her:
Tell her I hold as giddily as Fortune:
But it is that miracle, and Queen of Iems
That nature prankes her in, attracts my soul.

But if she cannot love you sir.


It cannot be so answered.


Sooth but you must.
Say that some Lady, as perhaps there is,
Has for your love as great a pang of heart
As you have for Oliuia: you cannot love her:
You tell her so: Must she not then be answered?

There is no woman's sides
Can bide the beating of so strong a passion,
As love does give my heart: no woman's heart
So big, to hold so much, they lack retention.
Alas, their love may be called appetite,
No motion of the Liver, but the Pallat,
That suffer surfeit, cloyment, and revolt,
But mine is all as hungry as the Sea,
And can digest as much, make no compare
Between that love a woman can bear me,
And that I owe Oliuia.

I but I know.


What do thou know?


Too well what love women to men may owe:
In faith they are as true of heart, as we.
My Father had a daughter loved a man
As it might be perhaps, were I a woman
I should your Lordship.

And what is her history?


A blanke my Lord: she never told her love,
But let concealment like a worm in th budde
Feed on her damask cheek: she pined in thought,
And with a green and yellow melancholy,
She sat like Patience on a Monument,
Smiling at grief. Was not this love indeed?
We men may say more, swear more, but indeed
Our shows are more then will: for still we prove
Much in our vows, but little in our love.

But di'de thy sister of her love my Boy?

I am all the daughters of my Fathers house,
And all the brothers too: and yet I know not.
Sir, shall I to this Lady?

I that is the Theme,
To her in haste: give her this Jewel: say,
My love can give no place, bide no denay.

Come thy ways Signior Fabian.


Nay I Will come: if I loose a scruple of this sport, let me be boiled to death
with Melancholy


Would thou not be glad to have the niggardly Rascally sheepe-biter, come by
some notable shame


I would exult man: you know he brought me out of favor with my Lady, about a
Beare-baiting here


To anger him we will have the Bear again, and we will fool him black and
blew, shall we not sir Andrew


And we do not, it is pity of our lives.


Here comes the little villain: How now my Mettle of India?


Get ye all three into the box tree: Maluolio's coming down this walk, he
has been yonder in the Sun practicing behavior to his own shadow this half
hour: observe him for the love of Mockery: for I know this Letter will make a
contemplative Idiot of him. Close in the name of ieasting, lie thou there: for
here comes the Trowt, that must be caught with tickling


It Is but Fortune, all is fortune. Maria once told me she did affect me, and I
have heard her self come thus near, that should she fancy, it should be one
of my complexion. Besides she uses me with a more exalted respect, then any
one else that follows her. What should I think on it


Here Is an ouer-weening rogue.


Oh peace: Contemplation makes a rare Turkey Cock of him, how he iets under
his advanced plumes


Slight I could so beat the Rogue.


Peace I say.


To be Count Maluolio.


Ah Rogue.


Pistol him, pistol him.


Peace, peace.


There is example for it: The Lady of the Strachy, married the yeoman of the
wardrobe


Fie on him Iezabel.


O peace, now he is deeply in: look how imagination blows him.


Having been three months married to her, sitting in my state.


O for a stone-bow to hit him in the eye.


Calling my Officers about me, in my branched Velvet gown: having come from a
day bed, where I have left Oliuia sleeping


Fire and Brimstone.


O peace, peace.


And then to have the humor of state: and after a demure travail of regard:
telling them I know my place, as I would they should do theirs: to ask for
my kinsman Toby


Boltes and shackles.


Oh peace, peace, peace, now, now.


Seven of my people with an obedient start, make out for him: I frown the
while, and perchance wind up my watch, or play with my some rich Jewel: Toby
approaches; curtsies there to me


Shall this fellow live?


Though our silence be drawn from us with cars, yet peace.


I extend my hand to him thus: quenching my familiar smile with an austere
regard of control


And does not Toby take you a blow of the lips, then?


Saying, Cosine Toby, my Fortunes having cast me on your Niece, give me this
prerogative of speech


What, what?


You must amend your drunkenness.


Out scab.


Nay patience, or we break the sinews of our plot?


Besides you waste the treasure of your time, with a foolish knight.


That Is me I warrant you.


One sir Andrew.


I knew 'twas I, for many do call me fool.


What employment have we here?


Now is the Woodcocke near the gin.


Oh peace, and the spirit of humors intimate reading aloud to him.


By my life this is my Ladies hand: these be her very C's* her V's, and her
T's, and thus makes she het great P's. It is in contempt of question her hand


Her C's, her V's, and her T's: why that?


To the unknown beloved, this, and my good Wishes: Her very Phra^es: By your
leave wax. Soft, and the impressure her Lucrece, with which she uses to seal:
it is my Lady: To whom should this be


This winnes him, Liver and all.


Jove knows I love, but who,
Lips do not move, no man must know.
No man must know. What follows?
The numbers alter^d: No man must know,
If this should be thee Maluolio?

Marry hang thee brocke.


I may command where I adore, but silence like a Lucresse knife:
With bloodlesse stroke my heart does gore, M.O.A.I. does sway my life.

A fustian riddle.


Excellent Wench, say I.


M.O.A.I. does sway my life. Nay but first let me see, let me see, let me see.


What dish a poison has she dressed him?


And with what wing the stallion checkes at it?


I may command, where I adore: Why she may command me: I serve her, she is my
Lady. Why this is evident to any formal capacity. There is no obstruction in
this, and the end: What should that Alphabeticall position portend, if I could
make that resemble something in me? Softly, M.O.A.I


O I, make up that, he is now at a cold sent.


Sowter will cry upon it for all this, though it be as rank as a Fox.


M. Maluolio, M. why that begins my name.


Did not I say he would work it out, the Curre is excellent at faults.


M. But then there is no consonancy in the sequel that suffers under
probation: A. should follow, but O. does


And O shall end, I hope.


I, or I Will cudgel him, and make him cry O.


And then I. comes behind.


I, and you had any eye behind you, you^ might see more detraction at your
heels, then Fortunes before you


M, O, A, I. This simulation is not as the former: and yet to crush this a
little, it would bow to me, for every one of these Letters are in my name.
Soft, here follows prose: If this fall into thy hand, reuolue. In my stars I
am above thee, but be not afraid of greatness: Some are become great, some
atcheeues greatness, and some have greatness thrust upon em. Thy fates open
their hands, let thy blood and spirit embrace them, and to invre thy self to
what thou art like to be: cast thy humble slough, and appear fresh. Be
opposite with a kinsman, surly with servants: Let thy tongue tang arguments of
state; put thy self into the trick of singularity. She thus aduises thee,
that sighs for thee. Remember who commended thy yellow stockings, and wished
to see thee ever cross garter'd: I say remember, go too, thou art made if
thou desir'st to be so: If not, let me see thee a steward still, the fellow of
servants, and not worthy to touch Fortunes singers Farewell, She that would
alter services with thee, tht fortunate unhappy daylight and champian discouers
not more: This is open, I will be proud, I will read pollticke Authors, I
will baffle Sir Toby, I will wash off gross acquaintance, I will be point
devise, the very man. I do not now fool my self, to let imagination jade me;
for every reason excites to this, that my Lady loves me. She did commend my
yellow stockings of late, she did praise my leg being crosse-garter'd, and
in this she manifests her self to my love, and with a kind of iniunction
drives me to these habites of her liking. I thank my stars, I am happy: I
will be strange, stout, in yellow stockings, and cross Garter'd, even with
the swiftness of putting on. Jove, and my stars be praised. Here is yet a
postscript. Thou can not choose but know who I am. If thou entertainst my
love, let it appear in thy smiling, thy smiles become thee well. Therefore in
my presence still smile, deero my sweet, I prithee. Jove I thank thee, I will
smile, I will do every thing that thou will have me


I will not give my part of this sport for a pension of thousands to be paid
from the Sophy


I could marry this wench for this device.


So could I too.


And ask no other dowry with her, but such another jest.


Nor I neither.


Here comes my noble gull catcher.


Will thou set thy foot of my neck.


Or of mine either?


Shall I play my freedom at tray-trip, and become thy bondslaue?


In Faith, or I either?


Why, thou have put him in such a dream, that when the image of it leaves him,
he must run mad


Nay but say true, does it work upon him?


Like Aqua vite with a Midwife.


If you will then see the fruits of the sport, mark his first approach before
my Lady: he will come to her in yellow stockings, and it is a color she
abhorres, and cross garter'd, a fashion she detests: and he will smile upon
her, which will now be so vnsuteable to her disposition, being addicted to a
melancholy, as she is, that it cannot but turn him into a notable contempt:
if you will see it follow me


To the gates of Tartar, thou most excellent devil of wit.


I Will make one too.


Save thee Friend and thy Music: do thou live by thy Tabor?


No sir, I live by the Church.


Art thou a Churchman?


No such matter sir, I do live by the Church: For, I do live at my house, and
my house does stand by the Churc


So thou may say the Kings lies by a beggar, if a beggar dwell near him: or
the Church stands by thy Tabor, if thy Tabor stand by the Church


You have said sir: To see this age: A sentence is but a cheu'rill glove to a
good wit, how quickly the wrong side may be turned outward


Nay that is certain: they that dally nicely with words, may quickly make them
wanton


I would therefore my sister had had no name Sir.


Why man?


Why sir, her names a word, and to dally with that word, might make my sister
wanton: But indeed, words are very Rascals, since bonds disgraced them


Thy reason man?


Troth sir, I can yield you none without words, and words are grown so
false, I am loath to prove reason with them


I warrant thou art a merry fellow, and car'st for nothing.


Not so sir, I do care for something: but in my conscience sir, I do not care
for you: if that be to care for nothing sir, I would it would make you
invisible


Art not thou the Lady Oliuia's fool?


No indeed sir, the Lady Oliuia has no folly, she will keep no fool sir,
till she be married, and fools are as like husbands, as Pilchers are to
Herrings, the Husbands the bigger, I am indeed not her fool, but her
corrupter of words


I saw thee late at the Count Orsino's.


Foolery sir, does walk about the Orb like the Sun, it shines every where. I
would be sorry sir, but the Fool should be as often with your Master, as with my
Mistress: I think I saw your wisdom there


Nay, and thou pass upon me, I Will no more with thee. Hold there is expenses for
thee


Now Jove in his next commodity of hair, send thee a beard.


By my troth I Will tell thee, I am almost sick for one, though I would not have
it grow on my chinne. Is thy Lady within


Would not a pair of these have bred sir?


Yes being kept together, and put to use.


I would play Lord Pandarus of Phrygia sir, to bring a Cressida to this Troylus.


I understand you sir, it is well begged.


The matter I hope is not great sir; begging, but a beggar: Cressida was a
beggar. My Lady is within sir. I will conster to them whence you come, who you
are, and what you would are out of my welkin, I might say Element, but the word
is ouer-worne


This fellow is wise enough to play the fool,
And to do that well, craves a kind of wit:
He must observe their mood on whom he jests,
The quality of persons, and the time:
And like the Haggard, check at every Feather
That comes before his eye. This is a practice,
As full of labor as a Wise-mans Art:
For folly that he wisely shows, is fit;
But wisemens folly fallen, quite taint their wit.

Save you Gentleman.


And you sir.


Dieu vou guard Monsieur.


Et vouz ousie vostre seruiture.


I hope sir, you are, and I am yours.


Will you encounter the house, my Niece is desirous you should enter, if your
trade be to her


I am bound to your Niece sir, I mean she is the list of my voyage.


Taste your legs sir, put them to motion.


My legs do better understand me sir, then I understand what you mean by
bidding me taste my legs


I mean to go sir, to enter.


I will answer you with gate and entrance, but we are prevented.

Most excellent accomplished Lady, the heavens rain Odours on you.


That youth's a rare Courtier, rain odours, well.


My matter has no voice Lady, but to your own most pregnant and vouchsafed
ear


Odours, pregnant, and vouchsafed: I Will get 'em all three already.


Let the Garden door be shut, and leave me to my hearing. Give me your hand
sir


My duty Madam, and most humble seruice^


What is your name?


Cesario is your servants name, fair Princess.


My servant sir? 'Twas never merry world, Since lowly feigning was called
complement: y' are servant to the Count Orsino youth


And he is yours, and his must needs be yours: your servants servant, is your
servant Madam


For him, I think not on him: for his thoughts,
Would they were blankes, rather then filled with me.

Madam, I come to whet your gentle thoughts
On his behalf.

O by your leave I pray you.
I bad you never speak again of him;
But would you undertake another suite
I had rather hear you, to solicit that,
Then Music from the spheres.

Dear Lady.


Give me leave, beseech you: I did send,
After the last enchantment you did hear,
A Ring in chase of you. So did I abuse
My self, my servant, and I fear me you:
Under your hard construction must I sit,
To force that on you in a shameful cunning
Which you knew none of yours. What might you think?
Have you not set mine Honor at the stake,
And baited it with all the vnmuzled thoughts
That tyrannous heart can think? To one of your receiving
Enough is shown, a Cipresse, not a bosom,
Hides my heart: so let me hear you speak.

I pity you.


That Is a degree to love.


No not a grize: for it is a vulgar proof
That very often we pity enemies.

Why then me thinks it is time to smile again:
O world, how apt the poor are to be proud?
If one should be a prey, how much the better
To fall before the Lion, then the Wolf?
The clock vpbraides me with the waste of time:
Be not afraid good youth, I will not have you,
And yet when wit and youth is come to harvest,
your wife is like to reap a proper man:
There lies your way, due West.

Then Westward hoe:
Grace and good disposition attend your Ladyship:
you will nothing Madam to my Lord, by me:

Stay: I prithee tell me what thou think of me?


That you do think you are not what you are.


If I think so, I think the same of you.


Then think you right: I am not what I am.


I would you were, as I would have you be.


Would it be better Madam, then I am?
I wish it might, for now I am your fool.

O what a deal of scorn, looks beautiful?
In the contempt and anger of his lip,
A murdrous guilt shows not it self more soon,
Then love that would seem hid: Loves night, is noone.
Cesario, by the Roses of the Spring,
By maid-hood, honor, truth, and every thing,
I love thee so, that maugre all thy pride,
Nor wit, nor reason, can my passion hide:
Do not extort thy reasons from this clause,
For that I woo, thou therefore have no cause:
But rather reason thus, with reason fetter;
Love sought, is good: but given unsought, is better.

By innocence I swear, and by my youth,
I have one heart, one bosom, and one truth,
And that no woman has, nor never none
Shall mistress be of it, save I alone.
And so adieu good Madam, never more,
Will I my Masters tears to you deplore.

Yet come again: for thou perhaps may move
That heart which now abhorres, to like his love.

No faith, I Will not stay a jot longer:


Thy reason dear venom, give thy reason.


You must neede^ yield your reason, Sir Andrew?


Marry I saw your Niece do more favors to the Counts Seruing-man, then ever
she bestowed upon me: I saw't in th Orchard


Did she see the while, old boy, tell me that.


As plain as I see you now.


This was a great argument of love in her toward you.


S'light; will you make an Ass of me.


I will prove it legitimate sir, upon the Oaths of judgment, and reason.


And they have been grand Jury men, since before Noah was a Saylor.


She did show favor to the youth in your sight, only to exasperate you, to
awake your dormouse valor, to put fire in your Heart, and brimstone in your
Liver: you should then have accosted her, and with some excellent jests,
fire-new from the mint, you should have bangd the youth into dumbness: this
was looked for at your hand, and this was b^ulkt: the double gilt of this
opportunity you let time wash off* and you are now sayld into the North of my
Ladies opinion, where you will hang like an ysickle on a Dutchmans beard,
unless you do redeem it, by some laudable attempt, either of valor or
policy


And't be any way, it must be with Valor, for policy I hate: I had as liefe
be a Brownist, as a Politician


Why then build me thy fortunes upon the basis of valor. Challenge me the
Counts youth to sight with him hurt him in eleven places, my Niece shall take
note of it, and assure thy self, there is no loue-Broker in the world, can
more prevail in man's commendation with woman, then report of valor


There is no way but this sir Andrew.


Will either of you bear me a challenge to him?


^o, write it in a martial hand, be cursed and brief: it is no matter how
witty, so it be eloquent, and full of invention: taunt hi^ with the license
of Ink: if thou thou'st him some thrice, it shall not be amiss, and as many
Lies, as will lie in thy sheet of paper, although the sheet were big enough
for the bed of Ware in England, set 'em down, go about it. Let there be
gaulle enough in thy ink, though thou write with a Goo^e-pen, no matter: about
it


Where shall I find you?


We Will call thee at the Cubiculo: Go.


This is a dear Manakin to you Sir Toby.


I have been dear to him lad, some two thousand strong, or so.


We shall have a rare Letter from him; but you will not deliuer't.


Never trust me then: and by all means stir on the youth to an answer. I
think Oxen and waine-ropes cannot hale them together. For Andrew, if he were
opened and you find so much blood in his Liver, as will clog the foot of a
flea, I Will eat the rest of the anatomy


And his opposite the youth bears in his visage no great presage of cruelty.


Look where the youngest Wren of mine comes.


If you desire the spleen, and will laughe your selves into stitches, follow
me; yond gull Maluolio is turned Heathen, a very Renegatho; for there is no
christian that means to be saved by believing rightly, can ever believe such
impossible passages of grossness. He Is in yellow stockings


And cross garter'd?


Most villanously: like a Pedant that keeps a School in th Church: I have
dogged him like his murderer. He does obey every point of the Letter that I
dropped, to betray him: He does smile his face into more lines, then is in the
new Map, with the augmentation of the Indies: you have not seen such a thing
as it is: I can hardly forbear hu^ling things at him, I know my Lady will
strike him: if she do, he will smile, and take it for a great favor


Come bring us, bring us where he is.


I would not by my will have troubled you,
But since you make your pleasure of your pains,
I will no further chide you.

I could not stay behind you: my desire
(More sharp then filed steel) did spur me forth,
And not all love to see you (though so much
As might have drawn one to a longer voyage)
But jealousy, what might befall your rrauell,
Being skillesse in these parts: which to a stranger,
Unguided, and vnfriended, often prove
Rough, and vnhospitable. My willing love,
The rather by these arguments of fear
Set forth in your pursuit.

My kind Anthonio,
I can no other answer make, but thanks,
And thanks: and ever often good turns,
Are shuffel'd off with such vncurrant pay:
But were my worth, as is my conscience firm,
You should find better dealing: what is to do?
Shall we go see the relics of this Town?

To morrow sir, best first go see your Lodging?


I am not weary, and it is long to night
I pray you let us satisfy our eyes
With the memorials, and the things of fame
That do renown this City.

Would youl'd pardon me:
I do not without danger walk these streets.
Once in a sea fight against the Count his galleys,
I did some service, of such note indeed,
That were I taken here, it would scarce be answered.

Belike you slew great number of his people.


Th offense is not of such a bloody nature,
Albeit the quality of the time, and quarrel
Might well have given us bloody argument:
It might have since been answered in repaying
What we took from them, which for Traffiques sake
Most of our City did. Only my self stood out,
For which if I be lapsed in this place
I shall pay dear.

Do not then walk too open.


It does not fit me: hold sir, here is my purse,
In the South Suburbs at the Elephant
Is best to lodge: I will bespeake our diet,
Whiles you beguile the time, and feed your knowledge
With viewing of the Town, there shall you have me.

Why I your purse?


Happily your eye shall light upon some toy
You have desire to purchase: and your store
I think is not for idle Markets, sir.

I Will be your purse-bearer, and leave you
For an hour.

To the Elephant.


I do remember.


I have sent after him, he says he will come:
How shall I feast him? What bestow of him?
For youth is bought more often, then begged, or borrowed.
I speak too loud: Where Is Maluolio, he is sad, and civil,
And suites well for a servant with my fortunes,
Where is Maluolio?

He Is coming Madame:
But in very strange manner. He is sure possessed Madam.

Why what is the matter, does he rave?


No Madam, he does nothing but smile: your Ladyship were best to have some
guard about you, if he come, for sure the man is tainted in's wits


Go call him hither.
I am as mad as he,
If sad and merry madness equal be.
How now Maluolio?

Sweet Lady, ho, ho.


Smil'st thou? I sent for thee upon a sad occasion.


Sad Lady, I could be sad:
This does make some obstruction in the blood:
This crosse-gartering, but what of that?
If it please the eye of one, it is with me as the very true
Sonnet is: Please one, and please all.

Why how do thou man?
What is the matter with thee?

Not black in my mind, though yellow in my legs: It did come to his hands,
and Commands shall be executed. I think we do know the sweet Roman hand


Will thou go to bed Maluolio?


To bed? I sweet heart, and I Will come to thee.


God comfort thee: Why do thou smile so, and kiss thy hand so often?


How do you Maluolio?


At your request:
Yes Nightingales answer Dawes.

Why appear you with this ridiculous boldness before my Lady.


Be not afraid of greatness: 'twas well writ.


What meanst thou by that Maluolio?


Some are borne great.


Ha?


Some atcheeue greatness.


What say thou?


And some have greatness thrust upon them.


Heaven restore thee.


Remember who commended thy yellow stockings.


Thy yellow stockings?


And wished to see thee cross garter'd.


Cross garter'd?


Go too, thou art made, if thou desir'st to be so.


Am I made?


If not, let me see thee a servant still.


Why this is very Midsommer madness.


Madame, the young Gentleman of the Count Orsino's is returned, I could hardly
entreat him back: he attends your Ladyships pleasure


I Will come to him.
Good Maria, let this fellow be look^d too. Where Is my Cosine Toby, let some of
my people have a special care of him, I would not have him miscarrie for the
half of my Dowry


Oh ho, do you come near me now: no worse man then sir Toby to look to me.
This concurres directly with the Letter, she sends him on purpose, that I may
appear stubborn to him: for she incites me to that in the Letter. Cast thy
humble slough says she: be opposite with a Kinsman, surly with servants, let
thy tongue langer with arguments of state, put thy self into the trick of
singularity: and consequently setts down the manner how: as a sad face, a
reverend carriage, a slow tongue, in the habit of some Sir of note, and so
forth. I have lymde her, but it is Jove's doing, and Jove make me thankful.
And when she went away now, let this Fellow be looked too: Fellow? not
Maluolio, nor after my degree, but Fellow. Why every thing adheres together,
that no dram of a scruple, no scruple of a scruple, no obstacle, no
incredulous or unsafe circumstance: What can be said? Nothing that can be, can
come between me, and the full prospect of my hopes. Well Jove, not I, is the
doer of this, and he is to be thanked


Which way is he in the name of sanctity. If all the devils of hell be drawn
in little, and Legion himself possessed him, yet I Will speak to him


Here he is, here he is: how is it with you sir?
How is it with you man?

Go off, I discard you: let me enjoy my private: go off.


Lo, how hollow the s^end speaks within him; did not I tell you? Sir Toby, my
Lady prays you to have a care of him


Ah ha, does she so?


Go too, go too: peace, peace, we must deal gently with him: Let me alone.
How do you Maluolio? How is it with you? What man, defy the devil: consider,
he is an enemy to mankind


Do you know what you say?


La you, and you speak ill of the devil, how he takes it at heart Pray God he
be not bewitched


Carry his water to the wise woman.


Marry and it shall be done to morrow morning if I live. My Lady would not
loose him for more then i will say


How now mistress?


Oh Lord.


Prithee hold thy peace, this is not the way: Do you not see you move him? Let
me alone with him


No way but gentleness, gently, gently: the Fiend is rough, and will not be
roughly used


Why how now my bawcock? how do you chuck?


Sir.


I biddy, come with me. What man, it is not for gravity to play at cherrie pit
with satan Hang him foul Col^i^r


Get him to say his prayers, good sir Toby get him to pray.


My prayers Minx.


No I warrant you, he will not hear of godliness.


Go hang your selves all: you are idle shallowe things, I am not of your
element, you shall know more hereafter


Is It possible?


If this were played upon a stage now, I could condemn it as an improbable
fiction


His very genius has taken the infection of the device man.


Nay pursue him now, least the device take air, and taint.


Why we shall make him mad indeed.


The house will be the quieter.


Come, we will have him in a dark room and bound. My Niece is already in the
belief that he is mad: we may carry it thus for our pleasure, and his penance,
til our very pastime tired out of breath, prompt us to have mercy on him: at
which time, we will bring the device to the bar and crown thee for a finder of
madmen: but see, but see


More matter for a May morning.


Here Is the Challenge, read it: I warrant there is vinegar and pepper in it.


Is It so saucy?


I, is it? I warrant him: do but read.


Give me.
Youth, whatsoever thou art, thou art but a scuruy fellow.

Good, and valiant.


Wonder not, nor admire not in thy mind why I do call thee so, for I will
show thee no reason for it.


A good note, that keeps you from the blow of ye Law


Thou comst to the Lady Oliuia, and in my sight she uses thee kindly: but thou
lie in thy throat, that is not the matter I challenge thee for.


Very brief, and to exceeding good sence-lesse.


I will way-lay thee going home, where if it be thy chance to kill me.


Good.


Thou kilst me like a rogue and a villain.


Still you keep of th windy side of the Law: good.


Fartheewell, and God have mercy upon one of our souls. He may have mercy
upon mine, but my hope is better, and so look to thy self. Thy friend as thou
use him, and thy sworn enemy, Andrew Ague-cheeke


If this Letter move him not, his legs cannot:
I Will giu't him.

You may have very sit occasion fot't: he is now in some commerce with my
Lady, and will by and by depart


Go sir Andrew: scout me for him at the corner of the Orchard like a
bum-Baylie: so soon as ever thou see him, draw, and as thou draw'st, swear
horrible: for ^t comes to pass often, that a terrible oath, with a swaggering
accent sharply twang'd off, gives manhood more approbation, then ever proof
it self would have earned him. Away


Nay let me alone for swearing.


Now will not I deliver his Letter: for the behavior of the young Gentleman,
gives him out to be of good capacity, and breeding: his employment between his
Lord and my Niece, confirms no less. Therefore, this Letter being so
excellently ignorant, will breed no terror in the youth: he will find it comes
from a Clodde-pole. But sir, I will deliver his Challenge by word of mouth; set
upon Ague-cheeke a notable report of valor, and drive the Gentleman (as I know
his youth will aptly receive it) into a most hideous opinion of his rage,
skill, fury, and impetuositie. This will so fright them both, that they will
kill one another by the look, like Cockatrices


Here he comes with your Niece, give them way till he take leave, and
presently after him


I will meditate the while upon some horrid message for a Challenge.


I have said too much unto a heart of stone,
And laid mine honor too vnchary on it:
There Is something in me that reproues my fault:
But such a headstrong potent fault it is,
That it but mockes reproof.

With the same hauiour that your passion bears,
Goes on my Masters greefes.

Here, wear this Jewel for me, it is my picture:
Refuse it not, it has no tongue, to vex you:
And I beseech you come again to morrow.
What shall you ask of me that I Will deny,
That honor (saved) may upon asking give.

Nothing but this, your true love for my master.


How with mine honor may I give him that,
Which I have given to you.

I will acquit you.


Well* come again to morrow: far-thee-well,
A Fiend like thee might bear my soul to hell.

Gentleman, God save thee.


And you sir.


That defense thou have, betake the to it: of what nature the wrongs are thou
have done him, I know not: but thy intercepter full of despite, bloody as the
Hunter, attends thee at the Orchard end: dismount thy tucke, be yare in thy
preparation, for thy assaylant is quick, skillful, and deadly


You mistake sir I am sure, no man has any quarrel to me: my remembrance is
very free and clear from any image of offense done to any man


You Will find it otherwise I assure you: therefore, if you hold your life at any
price, betake you to your guard: for your opposite has in him what youth,
strength, skill, and wrath, can furnish man withal


I pray you sir what is he?


He is knight dubbed with vnhatch'd Rapier, and on carpet consideration, but he
is a devil in private brall, souls and bodies has he diuorc'd three, and his
incensement at this moment is so implacable, that satisfaction can be none, but
by pangs of death and sepulcher: Hob, nob, is his word: giu't or take it


I will return again into the house, and desire some conduct of the Lady. I
am no fighter, I have heard of some kind of men, that put quarrels purposely
on others, to taste their valor: belike this is a man of that quirke


Sir, no: his indignation deriues it self out of a very computent injury,
therefore get you on, and give him his desire. Back you shall not to the
house, unless you undertake that with me, which with as much safety you might
answer him: therefore on, or strippe your sword stark naked: for meddle you
must that is certain, or forswear to wear iron about you


This is as uncivil as strange. I beseech you do me this courteous office, as
to know of the Knight what my offense to him is: it is something of my
negligence, nothing of my purpose


I will do so. Signiour Fabian, stay you by this Gentleman, till my return.


Pray you sir, do you know of this matter?


I know the knight is incenst against you, even to a mortal arbitrament, but
nothing of the circumstance more


I beseech you what manner of man is he?


Nothing of that wonderful promise to read him by his form, as you are like
to find him in the proof of his valor. He is indeed sir, the most skillful,
bloody, and fatal opposite that you could possibly have found in any part of
Illyria: will you walk toward him, I will make your peace with him, if I can


I shall be much bound to you for it: I am one, that had rather go with sir
Priest, then sir knight: I care not who knows so much of my mettle


Why man hee^s a very devil, I have not seen such a firago: I had a pass
with him, rapier, scabberd, and all: and he gives me the stuck in with such a
mortal motion that it is inevitable: and on the answer, he pays you as
surely, as your feet hits the ground they step on. They say, he has bin Fencer
to the Sophy


Pox on it, I Will not meddle with him.


I but he will not now be pacified,
Fabian can scarce hold him yonder.

Plague on it, and I thought he had been vallant, and so cunning in Fence, I Would
have seen him damned ere I Would have challenged him. Let him let the matter
slip, and I Will give him my horse, gray Capilet


I Will make the motion: stand here, make a good show on it, this shall end
without the perdition of souls, marry I Will ride your horse as well as I ride
you

I have his horse to take up the quarrel, I have persuaded him the youths a
devil


He is as horribly conceited of him: and pants, and looks pale, as if a Bear
were at his heels


There Is no remedy sir, he will fight with you for's oath sake: marry he
has better bethought him of his quarrel, and he finds that now scarce to
be worth talking of: therefore draw for the supportance of his vow, he
protests he will not hurt you


Pray God defend me: a little thing would make me tell them how much I lack of
a man


Give ground if you see him furious.


Come sir Andrew, there is no remedy, the Gentleman will for his honors sake
have one bowt with you: he cannot by the Duello avoid it: but he has promised
me, as he is a Gentleman and a Soldiour, he will not hurt you. Come on, to it


Pray God he keep his oath.


I do assure you it is against my will.


Put up your sword: if this young Gentleman
Have done offense, I take the fault on me:
If you offend him, I for him defy you.

You sir? Why, what are you?


One sir, that for his love dares yet do more
Then you have heard him brag to you he will.

Nay, if you be an undertaker, I am for you.


O good sir Toby hold: here come the Officers.


I Will be with you anon.


Pray sir, put your sword up if you please.


Marry will I sir: and for that I promised you I Will be as good as my word. He
will bear you easily, and raines well


This is the man, do thy Office.


Anthonio, I arrest thee at the suit of Count Orsino


You do mistake me sir.


No sir, no jot: I know your favor well:
Though now you have no sea-cap on your head:
Take him away, he knows I know him well.

I must obey. This comes with seeking you:
But there is no remedy, I shall answer it:
What will you do: now my necessity
Makes me to ask you for my purse. It greeues me
Much more, for what I cannot do for you,
Then what befalls my self: you stand amazed,
But be of comfort.

Come sir away.


I must entreat of you some of that money.


What money sir?
For the fair kindness you have showed me here,
And part being prompted by your present trouble,
Out of my lean and low ability
I Will lend you some^hing: my having is not much,
I Will make division of my present with you:
Hold, there is half my Coffer.

Will you deny me now,
Is It possible that my deserts to you
Can lack persuasion. Do not tempt my misery,
Least that it make me so unsound a man
As to vpbraid you with those kindnesses
That I have done for you.

I know of none,
Nor know I you by voice, or any feature:
I hate ingratitude more in a man,
Then lying, vainness, babbling drunkenness,
Or any taint of vice, whose strong corruption
Inhabites our frail blood.

Oh heavens themselves.


Come sir, I pray you go.


Let me speak a little. This youth that you see here,
I snatched one half out of the jaws of death,
Releeu'd him with such sanctity of Jove;
And to his image, which me thought did promise
Most venerable worth, did I devotion.

What Is that to us, the time goes by: Away.


But oh, how vilde an idol proves this God:
Thou have Sebastian done good feature, shame.
In Nature, there is no blemish but the mind:
None can be called deformed, but the unkind.
Virtue is beauty, but the beauteous evil
Are empty trunkes, ore-flourish'd by the devil.

The man grows mad, away with him:
Come, come sir.

Lead me on.


Me thinks his words do from such passion fly
That he believes himself, so do not I:
Prove true imagination, oh prove true,
That I dear brother, be now taken for you.

Come hither Knight, come hither Fabian: Weel whisper ore a couplet or two of
most sage sawes


He named Sebastian: I my brother know
Yet living in my glass: even such, and so
In favor was my Brother, and he went
Still in this fashion, color, ornament,
For him I imitate: Oh if it prove,
Tempests are kind, and salt waves fresh in love.

A very dishonest paltry boy, and more a coward then a Hare, his dishonesty
appears, in leaving his friend here in necessity, and denying him: and for his
cowardship ask Fabian


A Coward, a most devout Coward, religious in it.


Slid I Will after him again, and beat him.


Do, cuffe him soundly, but never draw thy sword


And I do not.


Come, let us see the event.


I dare lay any money, twill be nothing yet.


Will you make me believe, that I am not sent for you?


Go too, go too, thou art a foolish fellow,
Let me be clear of thee.

Well held our in faith: No, I do not know you, nor I am not sent to you by my
Lady, to bid you come speak with her: nor your name is not Master C^sario, nor
this is not my nose neither: Nothing that is so, is so


I prithee vent thy folly some-where else, thou know not me.


Vent my folly: He has heard that word of some great man, and now applies it to
a fool. Vent my folly: I am afraid this great lubber the World will prove a
Cockney: I prithee now vngird thy strangenes, and tell me what I shall vent to
my Lady? Shall I vent to her that thou art coming


I prithee foolish greek depart from me, there is money for thee, if you tarry
longer, I shall give worse payment


By my troth thou have an open hand: these Wisemen that give fools money, get
themselves a good report, after fourteen years purchase


Now sir, have I met you again: there is for you.


Why there is for thee, and there, and there,
Are all the people mad?

Hold sir, or I Will throw your dagger ore the house.


This will I tell my Lady straight, I would not be in some of your coats for
two pence


Come on sir, hold.


Nay let him alone, I Will go another way to work with him: I Will have an action of
Battery against him, if there be any law in Illyria: though I stroke him first,
yet it is no matter for that


Let go thy hand.


Come sir, I will not let you go. Come my young soldier put up your iron: you
are well fleshed: Come on


I will be free from thee. What would you now?
If thou dare tempt me further, draw thy sword.

What, what? Nay then I must have an Ounce or two of this malapert blood from
you


Hold Toby, on thy life I charge thee hold.


Madam.


Will it be ever thus? Ungracious wretch,
Fit for the Mountains, and the barbarous Caves,
Where manners nere were preached: out of my sight.
Be not offended, dear Cesario:
Rudesbey be gone. I prithee gentle friend,
Let thy fair wisdom, not thy passion sway
In this uncivil, and unjust extent
Against thy peace. Go with me to my house,
And hear thou there how many fruitless prankes
This Ruffian has botch'd up, that thou thereby
May smile at this: Thou shall not choose but go:
Do not deny, beshrew his soul for me,
He started one poor heart of mine, in thee.

What relish is in this? How runs the stream?
Or I am mad, or else this is a dream:
Let fancy still my sense in Lethe sleep,
If it be thus to dream, still let me sleep.

Nay come I prithee, would thoud'st be ruled by me


Madam, I will.


O say so, and so be.


Nay, I prithee put on this gown, and this beard, make him believe thou art sir
Topas the Curate, do it quickly. I Will call sir Toby the whilst


Well, I Will put it on, and I will dissemble my self in it, and I would I were
the first that ever dissembled in such a gown. I am not tall enough to become
the function well, nor lean enough to be thought a good Studient: but to be
said an honest man and a good houskeeper goes as fairly, as to say, a careful
man, and a great scholar. The Competitors enter


Jove bless thee M. Parson.


Bonos dies sir Toby: for as the old hermit of Prage that never saw pen and
ink, very wittily said to a Niece of King Gorbodacke, that that is, is: so I
being M. Parson, am M. Parson; for what is that, but that? and is, but is


To him ^r Topas.


What hoa, I say, Peace in this prison.


The knave counterfets well: a good knave.


Who calls there?


Sir Topas the Curate, who comes to visit Maluolio the Lunaticke.


Sir Topas, sir Topas, good sir Topas go to my Lady.


Out hyperbolicall fiend, how vexest thou this man? Talkest thou nothing but of
Ladies


Well said M. Parson.


Sir Topas, never was man thus wronged, good sir Topas do not think I am mad:
they have laid me here in hideous darkness


Fie, thou dishonest satan: I call thee by the most modest terms, for I am
one of those gentle ones, that will use the devil himself with courtesy:
say thou that house is dark


As hell sir Topas.


Why it has bay Windows transparant as baricadoes, and the clear stores
toward the South north, are as lustrous as Ebony: and yet complainest thou of
obstruction


I am not mad sir Topas, I say to you this house is dark.


Madman thou errest: I say there is no darkness but ignorance, in which thou
art more puzel'd then the Egyptians in their fogge


I say this house is as dark as Ignorance, though Ignorance were as dark as
hell; and I say there was never man thus abused, I am no more mad then you
are, make the trial of it in any constant question


What is the opinion of Pythagoras concerning Wilde-fowle?


That the soul of our grandam, might happily inhabit a bird.


What think thou of his opinion?


I think nobly of the soul, and no way aproue his opinion.


Fare thee well: remain thou still in darkness, thou shall hold the opinion
of Pythagoras, ere I will allow of thy wits, and fear to kill a Woodcocke,
lest thou dispossess the soul of thy grandam. Fare thee well


Sir Topas, sir Topas.


My most exquisite sir Topas.


Nay I am for all waters.


Thou might have done this without thy berd and gown, he sees thee not.


To him in thine own voice, and bring me word how thou findst him: I would we
were well rid of this knavery. If he may be conveniently delivered, I would
he were, for I am now so far in offense with my Niece, that I cannot pursue
with any safety this sport the vppeshot. Come by and by to my Chamber


Hey Robin, jolly Robin, tell me how thy Lady does.


Fool.


My Lady is unkind, perdie.


Fool.


Alas why is she so?


Fool, I say.


She loves another. Who calls, ha?


Good fool, as ever thou will deserve well at my hand, help me to a Candle,
and pen, ink, and paper: as I am a Gentleman, I will live to be thankful to
thee for it


M. Maluolio?


I good Fool.


Alas sir, how fell you besides your five wits?


Fool, there was never man so notoriously abused: I am as well in my wits
(fool) as thou art


But as well: then you are mad indeed, if you be no better in your wits then a
fool


They have here propertied me: keep me in darkness, send Ministers to me,
Asses, and do all they can to face me out of my wits


Advise you what you say: the Minister is here. Maluolio, Maluolio, thy wits
the heavens restore: endeavor thy self to sleep, and leave thy vain bibble
babble


Sir Topas.


Maintain no words with him good fellow.
Who I sir, not I sir. God buy you good sir Topas: Marry Amen. I will sir, I
will

Fool, fool, fool I say.


Alas sir be patient. What say you sir, I am shent for speaking to you.


Good fool, help me to some light, and some paper, I tell thee I am as well
in my wits, as any man in Illyria


Well-a-day, that you were sir.


By this hand I am: good fool, some ink, paper, and light: and convey what I
will set down to my Lady: it shall advantage thee more, then ever the bearing
of Letter did


I will help you to it. But tell me true, are you not mad indeed, or do you but
counterfeit


Believe me I am not, I tell thee true.


Nay, I Will nere believe a madman till I see his brains
I will fetch you light, and paper, and ink.

Fool, I Will requite it in the highest degree:
I prithee be gone.

I am gone sir, and anon sir,
I Will be with you again:
In a trice, like to the old vice,
your need to sustain.
Who with dagger of lath, in his rage and his wrath,
cries ah ha, to the devil:
Like a mad lad, pair thy nails dad,
Adieu good man devil.

This is the air, that is the glorious Sun,
This pearl she gave me, I do feel't, and see it,
And though it is wonder that enwraps me thus,
Yet it is not madness. Where Is Anthonio then,
I could not find him at the Elephant,
Yet there he was, and there I found this credit,
That he did range the town to seek me out,
His council now might do me golden service,
For though my soul disputes well with my sense,
That this may be some error, but no madness,
Yet does this accident and flood of Fortune,
So far exceed all instance, all discourse,
That I am ready to distrust mine eyes,
And wrangle with my reason that persuades me
To any other trust, but that I am mad,
Or else the Ladies mad; yet if 'twere so,
She could not sway her house, command her followers,
Take, and give back affairs, and their dispatch,
With such a smooth, discreet, and stable bearing
As I perceive she does: there is something in it
That is deceivable. But here the Lady comes.
Blame not this haste of mine: if you mean well
Now go with me, and with this holy man
Into the Chantry by: there before him,
And underneath that consecrated roof,
Plight me the full assurance of your faith,
That my most iealious, and too doubtful soul
May live at peace. He shall conceal it,
Whiles you are willing it shall come to note,
What time we will our celebration keep
According to my birth, what do you say?

I Will follow this good man, and go with you,
And having sworn truth, ever will be true.

Then lead the way good father, and heavens so shine,
That they may fairly note this act of mine.

Now as thou love me, let me see his Letter.


Good M. Fabian, grant me another request.


Any thing.


Do not desire to see this Letter.


This is to give a dog, and in recompense desire my dog again.


Belong you to the Lady Oliuia, friends?


I sir, we are some of her trappings.


I know thee well: how do thou my good Fellow?


Truly sir, the better for my foes, and the worse for my friends.


Just the contrary: the better for thy friends.


No sir, the worse.


How can that be?


Marry sir, they praise me, and make an ass of me, now my foes tell me
plainly, I am an Ass: so that by my foes sir, I profit in the knowledge of my
self, and by my friends I am abused: so that conclusions to be as kisses, if
your four negatiues make your two affirmatiues, why then the worse for my
friends, and the better for my foes


Why this is excellent.


By my troth sir, no: though it please you to be one of my friends.


Thou shall not be the worse for me, there is gold.


But that it would be double dealing sir, I would you could make it another.


O you give me ill counsel.


Put your grace in your pocket sir, for this once, and let your flesh and blood
obey it


Well, I will be so much a sinner to be a double dealer: there is another.


Primo, secundo, tertio, is a good play, and the old saying is, the third
pays for all: the triplex sir, is a good tripping measure, or the belles of S.
Bennet sir, may put you in mind, one, two, three


You can fool no more money out of me at this throw: if you will let your
Lady know I am here to speak with her, and bring her along with you, it may
awake my bounty further


Marry sir, lullaby to your bounty till I come again. I go sir, but I would not
have you to think, that my desire of having is the sin of covetousness: but
as you say sir, let your bounty take a nappe, I will awake it anon


Here comes the man sir, that did rescue me.


That face of his I do remember well,
yet when I saw it last, it was besmeared
As black as Vulcan, in the smoke of war:
A bawbling Vessel was he Captain of,
For shallow draught and bulk vnprizable,
With which such scathfull grapple did he make,
With the most noble bottom of our Fleet,
That very envy, and the tongue of loss
Cride fame and honor on him: What Is the matter?

Orsino, this is that Anthonio
That took the Phoenix, and her fraught from Candy,
And this is he that did the Tiger board,
When your young Nephew Titus lost his leg;
Here in the streets, desperate of shame and state,
In private brabble did we apprehend him.

He did me kindness sir, drew on my side,
But in conclusion put strange speech upon me,
I know not what 'twas, but distraction.

Notable Pyrate, thou salt water Thief,
What foolish boldness brought thee to their mercies,
Whom thou in terms so bloody, and so dear
Have made thine enemies?

Orsino: Noble sir,
Be pleased that I shake off these names you give me:
Anthonio never yet was Thief, or Pyrate,
Though I confess, on base and ground enough
Orsino's enemy. A witchcraft drew me hither:
That most ungrateful boy there by your side,
From the rude seas enraged and foamy mouth
Did I redeem: a wrack past hope he was:
His life I gave him, and did thereto add
My love without retention, or restraint,
All his in dedication. For his sake,
Did I expose my self (pure for his love)
Into the danger of this adverse Town,
Drew to defend him, when he was beset:
Where being apprehended, his false cunning
(Not meaning to partake with me in danger)
Taught him to face me out of his acquaintance,
And grew a twenty years removed thing
While one would wink: denide me mine own purse,
Which I had recommended to his use,
Not half an hour before.

How can this be?


When came he to this Town?


To day my Lord: and for three months before,
No intrim, not a minutes vacancie,
Both day and night did we keep company.

Here comes the Countess, now heaven walks on earth:
But for thee fellow, fellow thy words are madness,
Three months this youth has tended upon me,
But more of that anon. Take him aside.

What would my Lord, but that he may not have,
Wherein Oliuia may seem serviceable?
Cesario, you do not keep promise with me.

Madam:


Gracious Oliuia.


What do you say Cesario? Good my Lord.


My Lord would speak, my duty hushes me.


If it be ought to the old tune my Lord,
It is as fat and fulsome to mine ear
As howling after Music.

Still so cruel?


Still so constant Lord.


What to perverseness? you uncivil Lady
To whose ingrate, and vnauspicious Altars
My soul the faithfull'st offerings have breathed out
That ere devotion tendered. What shall I do?

Even what it please my Lord, that shall become him


Why should I not, (had I the heart to do it)
Like to the Egyptian thief, at point of death
Kill what I love: (a savage jealousy,
That sometime savors nobly) but hear me this:
Since you to non-regardance cast my faith,
And that I partly know the instrument
That screwes me from my true place in your favor:
Live you the Marble-brested Tirant still.
But this your Minion, whom I know you love,
And whom, by heaven I swear, I tender dearly,
Him will I tear out of that cruel eye,
Where he sits crowned in his masters spite.
Come boy with me, my thoughts are ripe in mischief:
I Will sacrifice the Lamb that I do love,
To spite a Ravens heart within a Dove.

And I most iocund, apt, and willingly,
To do you rest, a thousand deaths would dye.

Where goes Cesario?


After him I love,
More then I love these eyes, more then my life,
More by all mores, then ere I shall love wife.
If I do feign, you witnesses above
Punish my life, for tainting of my love.

Aye me detested, how am I beguiled?


Who does beguile you? who does do you wrong?


Have thou forgot thy self? Is it so long?
Call forth the holy Father.

Come, away.


Whether my Lord? Cesario, Husband, stay.


Husband?


I Husband. Can he that deny?


Her husband, sirrah?


No my Lord, not I.


Alas, it is the baseness of thy fear,
That makes thee strangle thy propriety:
Fear not Cesario, take thy fortunes up,
Be that thou know thou art, and then thou art
As great as that thou fear.
O welcome Father:
Father, I charge thee by thy reverence
Here to unfold, though lately we intended
To keep in darkness, what occasion now
Reueales before it is ripe: what thou do know
Has newly past, between this youth, and me.

A Contract of eternal bond of love,
Confirmed by mutual ioynder of your hands,
Attested by the holy close of lips,
Strengthened by enterchangement of your rings,
And all the Ceremony of this compact
Sealed in my function, by my testimony:
Since when, my watch has told me, toward my grave
I have trauail'd but two hours.

O thou dissembling Cub: what will thou be
When time has sowed a grizzle on thy case?
Or will not else thy craft so quickly grow,
That thine own trip shall be thine overthrow:
Farewell, and take her, but direct thy feet,
Where thou, and I (henceforth) may never meet.

My Lord, I do protest.


O do not swear,
Hold little faith, though thou have too much fear.

For the love of God a Surgeon, send one presently to sir Toby.


What Is the matter?


H'as broke my head a-crosse, and has given Sir Toby a bloody Coxcombe too: for
the love of God your help, I had rather then forty pound I were at home


Who has done this sir Andrew?


The Counts Gentleman, one Cesario: we took him for a Coward, but he is the
very devil incardinate


My Gentleman Cesario?


Odd's lifelings here he is: you broke my head for nothing, and that that I
did, I was set on to do it by sir Toby


Why do you speak to me, I never hurt you:
you drew your sword upon me without cause,
But I bespake you fair, and hurt you not.

If a bloody coxcombe be a hurt, you have hurt me: I think you set nothing by
a bloody Coxecombe. Here comes sir Toby halting, you shall hear more: but if
he had not been in drink, he would have tickel'd you other gates then he did


How now Gentleman? how is it with you?


That Is all one, has hurt me, and there is the end on it:
Sot, did see Dicke Surgeon, sot?

O he is drunk sir Toby an hour agone: his eyes were set at eight in th
morning


Then he is a Rogue, and a passy measures panyn: I hate a drunken rogue.


Away with him? Who has made this havoc with them?


I Will help you sir Toby, because we'll be dressed together.


Will you help an Asse-head, and a coxcombe, and a knave: a thin faced knave,
a gull


Get him to bed, and let his hurt be looked too.


I am sorry Madam I have hurt your kinsman:
But had it been the brother of my blood,
I must have done no less with wit and safety.
You throw a strange regard upon me, and by that
I do perceive it has offended you:
Pardon me (sweet one) even for the vows
We made each other, but so late ago.

One face, one voice, one habit, and two persons,
A natural Perspectiue, that is, and is not.

Anthonio: O my dear Anthonio,
How have the hours racked, and tortured me,
Since I have lost thee?

Sebastian are you?


Fear thou that Anthonio?


How have you made division of your self,
An apple cleft in two, is not more twin
Then these two creatures. Which is Sebastian?

Most wonderful.


Do I stand there? I never had a brother:
Nor can there be that Deity in my nature
Of here, and every where. I had a sister,
Whom the blind waves and surges have devoured:
Of charity, what kin are you to me?
What Countreyman? What name? What Parentage?

Of Messaline: Sebastian was my Father,
Such a Sebastian was my brother too:
So went he suited to his watery tomb:
If spirits can assume both form and suite,
You come to fright us.

A spirit I am indeed,
But am in that dimension grossly clad,
Which from the womb I did participate.
Were you a woman, a^ the rest goes even,
I should my tears let fall upon your cheek,
And say, thrice welcome drowned Viola.

My father had a moale upon his brow.


And so had mine.


And did that day when Viola from her birth
Had numbered thirteen years.

O that record is lively in my soul,
He finished indeed his mortal act
That day that made my sister thirteen years.

If nothing lets to make us happy both,
But this my masculine usurped attire:
Do not embrace me, till each circumstance,
Of place, time, fortune, do co-here and iumpe
That I am Viola, which to confirm,
I Will bring you to a Captain in this Town,
Where lie my maiden weeds: by whose gentle help,
I was preserved to serve this Noble Count:
All the occurrence of my fortune since
Has been between this Lady, and this Lord.

So comes it Lady, you have been mistook:
But Nature to her bias drew in that.
You would have bin contracted to a Maid,
Nor are you therein (by my life) deceived,
You are betrothed both to a maid and man.

Be not amazed, right noble is his blood:
If this be so, as yet the glass seems true,
I shall have share in this most happy wrack,
Boy, thou have said to me a thousand times,
Thou never should love woman like to me.

And all those sayings, will I over swear,
And all those swearings keep as true in soul,
As does that Orbed Continent, the fire,
That seuers day ftom night.

Give me thy hand,
And let me see thee in thy woman's weeds.

The Captain that did bring me first on shore
Has my Maids garments: he upon some Action
Is now in durance, at Maluolio's suite,
A Gentleman, and follower of my Ladies.

He shall enlarge him: fetch Maluolio hither,
And yet alas, now I remember me,
They say poor Gentleman, he is much distract.
A most extracting frenzy of mine own
From my remembrance, clearly banished his.
How does he sirrah?

Truly Madam, he holds Beelzebub at the staves end as well as a man in his case
may do: has here writ a letter to you, I should have giuen't you to day
morning. But as a madmans Epistles are no Gospels, so it skilles not much when
they are delivered


Open't, and read it.


Look then to be well edified, when the Fool delivers the Madman. By the Lord
Madam


How now, art thou mad?


No Madam, I do but read madness: and your Ladyship will have it as it ought
to be, you must allow Vox


Prithee read in thy right wits.


So I do Madona: but to read his right wits, is to read thus: therefore,
perpend my Princess, and give ear


Read it you, sirrah.


Reads. By the Lord Madam, you wrong me, and the world shall know it: Though
you have put me into darkness, and given your drunken Cosine rule over me,
yet have I the benefit of my senses as well as your Ladieship. I have your own
letter, that induced me to the semblance I put on; with the which I doubt not,
but to do my self much right, or you much shame: think of me as you please. I
leave my duty a little unthought of, and speak out of my injury


Did he write this?


I Madame.


This savors not much of distraction.


See him delivered Fabian, bring him hither:
My Lord, so please you, these things further thought on,
To think me as well a sister, as a wife,
One day shall crown the alliance on it, so please you,
Here at my house, and at my proper cost.

Madam, I am most apt to embrace your offer:
Your Master quits you; and for your service done him,
So much against the mettle of your sex,
So far beneath your soft and tender breeding,
And since you called me Master, for so long:
Here is my hand, you shall from this time be
your Masters Mistress.

A sister, you are she.


Is this the Madman?


I my Lord, this same: How now Maluolio?


Madam, you have done me wrong,
Notorious wrong.

Have I Maluolio? No.


Lady you have, pray you peruse that Letter.
You must not now deny it is your hand,
Write from it if you can, in hand, or phrase,
Or say, it is not your seal, not your invention:
You can say none of this. Well, grant it then,
And tell me in the modesty of honor,
Why you have given me such clear lights of favor,
Bad me come smiling, and crosse-garter'd to you,
To put on yellow stockings, and to frown
Upon sir Toby, and the lighter people:
And acting this in an obedient hope,
Why have you suffered me to be imprisoned,
Kept in a dark house, visited by the Priest,
And made the most notorious gecke and gull,
That ere invention played on? Tell me why?

Alas Maluolio, this is not my writing,
Though I confess much like the Charracter:
But out of question, it is Marias hand.
And now I do bethink me, it was she
First told me thou wast mad; then came in smiling,
And in such forms, which here were presupposed
Upon thee in the Letter: prithee be content,
This practice has most shrewdly past upon thee:
But when we know the grounds, and authors of it,
Thou shall be both the Plaintiff and the Judge
Of thine own cause.

Good Madam hear me speak,
And let no quarrel, nor no braule to come,
Taint the condition of this present hour,
Which I have wondered at. In hope it shall not,
Most freely I confess my self, and Toby
Set this device against Maluolio here,
Upon some stubborn and discourteous parts
We had conceived against him. Maria writ
The Letter, at sir Tobyes great importance,
In recompense whereof, he has married her:
How with a sportfull malice it was followed,
May rather pluck on laughter then revenge,
If that the injuries be justly weighed,
That have on both sides past.

Alas poor Fool, how have they baffel'd thee?


Why some are borne great, some atchieue greatness, and some have greatness
thrown upon them. I was one sir, in this Interlude, one sir Topas sir, but
that is all one: By the Lotd Fool, I am not mad: but do you remember, Madam,
why laugh you at such a barren rascal, and you smile not he is gagged: and thus
the whirlegigge of time, brings in his reuenges


I Will be revenged on the whole pack of you?


He has been most notoriously abused.


Pursue him, and entreat him to a peace:
He has not told us of the Captain yet,
When that is known, and golden time conuents
A solemn Combination shall be made
Of our dear souls. Mean time sweet sister,
We will not part from hence. Cesaerio come
(For so you shall be while you are a man:)
But when in other habites you are seen,
Orsino's Mistress, and his fancies Queen.

When that I was and a little tine boy, with hey, ho, the wind and the rain:
A foolish thing was but a toy, for the rain it raineth every day.
But when I came to man's estate, with hey ho, etc.
Against Knaves and Thieves men shut their gate, for the rain, etc.
But when I came alas to wine, with hey ho, etc.
By swaggering could I never thrive, for the rain, etc.
But when I came unto my beds, with hey ho* etc.
With tospottes still had drunken heads, for the rain, etc.
A great while ago the world begone, hey ho, etc.
But that is all one, our Play is done, and we will strive to please you every day.


