IF you shall chance (Camillo) to visit Bohemia, on the like occasion whereon
my services are now on-foot, you shall see (as I have said) great difference
betwixt our Bohemia, and your Sicilia


I think, this coming Summer, the King of Sicilia means to pay Bohemia the
Visitation, which he justly owes him


Wherein our Entertainment shall shame us: we will be justified in our Loves:
for indeed --


'Beseech you --


Verily I speak it in the freedom of my knowledge: we cannot with such
magnificence -- in so rare -- I know not what to say -- We will give you
sleepie Drinks, that your Senses (vn-intelligent of our insufficience) may,
though they cannot praise us, as little accuse us


You pay a great deal to dear, for what is given freely.


'Beleeue me, I speak as my understanding instructs me, and as mine honesty
puts it to utterance


Sicilia cannot show himself ouer-kind to Bohemia: They were trayn'd together
in their Child-hoods; and there rooted betwixt them then such an affection,
which cannot choose but branch now. Since their more mature Dignities, and
Royal Necessities, made separation of their Society, their Encounters (though
not Personal) has been Royally attornyed with enter-change of Gifts, Letters,
loving Embassies, that they have seemed to be together, though absent: shook
hands, as over a Vast; and embraced as it were from the ends of opposed Winds.
The Heavens continue their Loves


I think there is not in the World, either Malice or Matter, to alter it. You
have an unspeakable comfort of your young Prince Mamillius: it is a Gentleman
of the greatest Promise, that ever came into my Note


I very well agree with you, in the hopes of him: it is a gallant Child; one,
that (indeed) Physics the Subject, makes old hearts fresh: they that went on
Crutches ere he was borne, desire yet their life, to see him a Man


Would they else be content to die?


Yes; if there were no other excuse, why they should desire to live.


If the King had no Son, they would desire to live on Crutches till he had
one


Nine Changes of the Watry-Starre has been
The Shepherds Note, since we have left our Throne
Without a Burden: Time as long again
Would be filled up (my Brother) with our Thanks,
And yet we should, for perpetuity,
Go hence in debt: And therefore, like a Cipher
(Yet standing in rich place) I multiply
With one we thank you, many thousands more,
That go before it.

Stay your Thanks a while,
And pay them when you part.

Sir, that is to morrow:
I am questioned by my fears, of what may chance,
Or breed upon our absence, that may blow
No sneaping Winds at home, to make us say,
This is put forth too truly: besides, I have stayed
To tire your Royalty.

We are tougher (Brother)
Then you can put us to it.

No longer stay.


One Seue'night longer.


Very sooth, to morrow.


We Will part the time betweene's then: and in that I Will no gaine-saying.


Press me not ('beseech you) so:
There is no Tongue that moves; none, none in the World
So soon as yours, could win me: so it should now,
Were there necessity in your request, although
'Twere needful I denied it. My Affairs
Do even drag me home-ward: which to hinder,
Were (in your Love) a Whip to me; my stay,
To you a Charge, and Trouble: to save both,
Farewell (our Brother.)

Tongue-ty'd our Queen? speak you.


I had thought (Sir) to have held my peace, until
You had drawn Oaths from him, not to stay: you (Sir)
Charge him too coldly. Tell him, you are sure
All in Bohemia's well: this satisfaction,
The by-gone-day proclaym'd, say this to him,
He Is beat from his best ward.

Well said, Hermione.


To tell, he longs to see his Son, were strong:
But let him say so then, and let him go;
But let him swear so, and he shall not stay,
We Will thwack him hence with Distaffes.
Yet of your Royal presence, I Will adventure
The borrow of a Week. When at Bohemia
You take my Lord, I Will give him my Commission,
To let him there a Month, behind the Gest
Prefixed for's parting: yet (good-deed) Leontes,
I love thee not a Jar of the Clock, behind
What Lady she her Lord. You Will stay?

No, Madame.


Nay, but you will?


I may not verily.


Verily?
You put me off with limber Vows: but I,
Though you would seek to vnsphere the Stars with Oaths,
Should yet say, Sir, no going: Verily
You shall not go; a Ladies Verily 'is
As potent as a Lords. Will you go yet?
Force me to keep you as a Prisoner,
Not like a Guest: so you shall pay your Fees
When you depart, and save your Thanks. How say you?
My Prisoner? or my Guest? by your dread Verily,
One of them you shall be.

Your Guest then, Madame:
To be your Prisoner, should import offending;
Which is for me, less easy to commit,
Then you to punish.

Not your Jailer then,
But your kind Hostess. Come, I Will question you
Of my Lords Tricks, and yours, when you were Boys:
You were pretty Lordings then?

We were (fair Queen)
Two Lads, that thought there was no more behind,
But such a day to morrow, as to day,
And to be Boy eternal.

Was not my Lord
The verver Wag of the two?

We were as twyn'd Lambs, that did frisk in the Sun,
And bleat the one at the other: what we changed,
Was Innocence, for Innocence: we knew not
The Doctrine of ill-doing, nor dreamed
That any did: Had we pursued that life,
And our weak Spirits never been higher reared
With stronger blood, we should have answered Heaven
Boldly, not guilty; the Imposition cleared,
Hereditarie ours.

By this we gather
You have tript since.

O my most sacred Lady,
Temptations have since then been borne to's: for
In those vnfledg'd days, was my Wife a Girl;
Your precious self had then not crossed the eyes
Of my young Play fellow.

Grace to boot:
Of this make no conclusion, least you say
Your Queen and I are Devils: yet go on,
The offenses we have made you do, we will answer,
If you first sinned with us: and that with us
You did continue fault; and that you slipped not
With any, but with us.

Is he won yet?


He Will stay (my Lord.)


At my request he would not:
Hermione (my dearest) thou never spoak'st
To better purpose.

Never?


Never, but once.


What? have I twice said well? when was it before?
I prithee tell me: cram's with praise, and make's
As fat as tame things: One good deed, dying tonguelesse,
Slaughters a thousand* waiting upon that.
Our praises are our Wages. You may ride's
With one soft Kiss a thousand Furlongs, ere
With Spur we heat an Acre. But to the Goal:
My last good deed, was to entreat his stay.
What was my first? it has an elder Sister,
Or I mistake you: O, would her Name were Grace.
But once before I spoke to the purpose? when?
Nay, let me haue't: I long.

Why, that was when
Three crabbed Months had sowr'd themselves to death,
Ere I could make thee open thy white Hand:
A clap thy self, my Love; then did thou utter,
I am yours for ever.

It Is Grace indeed.
Why lo-you now; I have spoke to the purpose twice:
The one, for ever earned a Royal Husband;
The other, for some while a Friend.

Too hot, too hot:
To mingle friendship far, is mingling bloods.
I have Tremor Cordis on me: my heart daunces,
But not for joy; not joy. This Entertainment
May a free face put on: derive a Liberty
From Heartinesse, from Bounty, fertile Bosom,
And well become the Agent: 't may; I grant:
But to be padling Palms, and pinching Fingers,
As now they are, and making practiced Smiles
As in a Looking-glass; and then to sigh, as 'twere
The Mort of the Dear: oh, that is entertainment
My Bosom likes not, nor my Brows. Mamillius,
Art thou my Boy?

I, my good Lord.


IN fecks:
Why that is my Bawcock: what? has't smutch'd thy Nose?
They say it is a Copy out of mine. Come Captain,
We must be neat; not neat, but cleanly, Captain:
And yet the Steer, the Heycfer, and the Calfe,
Are all called Neat. Still Virginalling
Upon his Palm? How now (you wanton Calfe)
Art thou my Calfe?

Yes, if you will (my Lord.)


Thou want a rough pash, and the shoots that I have
To be full, like me: yet they say we are
Almost as like as Eggs; Women say so,
(That will say any thing.) But were they false
As o're-dy'd Blacks, as Wind, as Waters; false
As Dice are to be wished, by one that fixes
No borne 'twixt his and mine; yet were it true,
To say this Boy were like me. Come (Sir Page)
Look on me with your Welkin eye: sweet Villain,
Most dear'st, my Collop: Can thy Dam, may't be
Affection? thy Intention stabs the Center.
Thou do make possible things not so held,
Communicat'st with Dreams (how can this be?)
With what is vnreall: thou coactiue art,
And fellow'st nothing. Then it is very credent,
Thou may co-ioyne with something, and thou do,
(And that beyond Commission) and I find it,
(And that to the infection of my Brains,
And hardening of my Brows.)

What means Sicilia?


He something seems unsettled.


How? my Lord?


What cheer? how is it with you, best Brother?


You look as if you held a Brow of much distraction:
Are you moved (my Lord?)

No, in good earnest.
How sometimes Nature will betray it is folly?
It Is tenderness? and make it self a Pastime
To harder bosoms? Looking on the Lines
Of my Boys face, me thoughts I did requoyle
Twenty three years, and saw my self vn-breech'd,
In my green Velvet Coat; my Dagger muzzel^d,
Least it should bite it is Master, and so prove
(As Ornaments often does) too dangerous:
How like (me thought) I then was to this Kernel,
This Squash, this Gentleman. Mine honest Friend,
Will you take Eggs for Money?

No (my Lord) I Will fight.


You will: why happy man be's dole. My Brother
Are you so fond of your young Prince, as we
Do seem to be of ours?

If at home (Sir)
He Is all my Exercise, my Mirth, my Matter;
Now my sworn Friend, and then mine Enemy;
My Parasite my Soldier: Statesman; all:
He makes a Iulyes day, short as December,
And with his varying child-nesse, cures in me
Thoughts, that would thick my blood.

So stands this Squire
Offic'd with me: We two will walk (my Lord)
And leave you to your grauer steps. Hermione,
How thou love us, show in our Brothers welcome;
Let what is dear in Sicily, be cheap:
Next to thy self, and my young Rouer, he is
Apparent to my heart.

If you would seek us,
We are yours in the Garden: shall's attend you there?

To your own bents dispose you: you will be found,
Be you beneath the Sky: I am angling now,
(Though you perceive me not how I give Line)
Go too, go too.
How she holds up the Neb? the Byll to him?
And arms her with the boldness of a Wife
To her allowing Husband. Gone already,
Ynch-thick knee-deepe; ore head and ears a fork'd one.
Go play (Boy) play: thy Mother plays, and I
Play too; but so disgraced a part, whose issue
Will hiss me to my Grave: Contempt and Clamor
Will be my Knell. Go play (Boy) play, there have been
(Or I am much deceived) Cuckolds ere now,
And many a man there is (even at this present,
Now, while I speak this) holds his Wife by the Arm,
That little thinks she has been sluyc'd in's absence,
And his Pond fished by his next Neighbor (by
Sir Smile, his Neighbor:) nay, there is comfort in it,
Whiles other men have Gates, and those Gates opened
(As mine) against their will. Should all despair
That have revolted Wives, the tenth of Mankind
Would hang themselves. Physic for it, there is none:
It is a bawdy Planet, that will strike
Where it is predominant; and it is powrefull: think it:
From East, West, North, and South, be it concluded,
No Barricodo for a Belly. Know It,
It will let in and out the Enemy,
With bag and baggage: many thousand on's
Have the Disease, and feele't not. How now Boy?

I am like you say.


Why, that is some comfort.
What? Camillo there?

I, my good Lord.


Go play (Mamillius) you are an honest man:
Camillo, this great Sir will yet stay longer.

You had much ado to make his Anchor hold,
When you cast out, it still came home.

Did note it?


He would not stay at your Petitions, made
His Business more material.

Did perceive it?
They Are here with me already; whispering, rounding:
Sicilia is a so-forth: it is far gone,
When I shall gust it last. How cam't (Camillo)
That he did stay?

At the good Queens entreatie.


At the Queens be it: Good should be pertinent,
But so it is, it is not. Was this taken
By any understanding Pate but thine?
For thy Conceit is soaking, will draw in
More then the common Blocks. Not noted, is it,
But of the finer Natures? by some Seueralls
Of Head-peece extraordinary? Lower Messes
Perchance are to this Business purblind? say.

Business, my Lord? I think most understand Bohemia stays here longer.


Ha?


Stays here longer.


I, but why?


To satisfy your Highness, and the Entreaties
Of our most gracious Mistress.

Satisfy?
The entreaties of your Mistress? Satisfy?
Let that suffice. I have trusted thee (Camillo)
With all the nearest things to my heart, as well
My Chamber-Councels, wherein (Priest-like) thou
Have cleans'd my Bosom: I, from thee departed
Thy Penitent reformed: but we have been
Deceived in thy Integrity, deceived
In that which seems so.

Be it forbid (my Lord.)


To bide upon it: thou art not honest: or
If thou inclin'st that way, thou art a Coward,
Which hoxes honesty behind, restrayning
From Course required: or else thou must be counted
A Servant, grafted in my serious Trust,
And therein negligent: or else a Fool,
That see a Game played home, the rich Stake drawn,
And take it all for jest.

My gracious Lord,
I may be negligent, foolish, and fearful,
In every one of these, no man is free,
But that his negligence, his folly, fear,
Among the infinite doings of the World,
Sometime puts forth in your affairs (my Lord.)
If ever I were wilfull-negligent,
It was my folly: if industriously
I played the Fool, it was my negligence,
Not weighing well the end: if ever fearful
To do a thing, where I the issue doubted,
Whereof the execution did cry out
Against the nonperformance, 'twas a fear
Which often infects the wisest: these (my Lord)
Are such allowed Infirmities, that honesty
Is never free of. But beseech your Grace
Be plainer with me, let me know my Trespass
By it is own visage; if I then deny it,
It Is none of mine.

Have not you seen Camillo?
(But that is past doubt: you have, or your eye-glasse
Is thicker then a Cuckolds Horn) or heard?
(For to a Vision so apparent, Rumor
Cannot be mute) or thought? (for Cogitation
Resides not in that man, that does not think)
My Wife is slipperie? If thou will confess,
Or else be impudently negative,
To have nor Eyes, nor Ears, nor Thought, then say
My Wife's a Holy-Horse, deserves a Name
As rank as any Flax-Wench, that puts to
Before her troth-plight: say it, and iustify't.

I would not be a stander-by, to hear
My Sovereign Mistress clouded so, without
My present vengeance taken: 'shrew my heart,
You never spoke what did become you less
Then this; which to reiterate, were sin
As deep as that, though true.

Is whispering nothing?
Is leaning Cheek to Cheek? is meating Noses?
Kissing with inside Lip? stopping the Ca^iere
Of Laughter, with a sigh? (a Note infallible
Of breaking Honesty) horsing foot on foot?
Skulking in corners? wishing Clocks more swift?
Hours, Minutes? Noone, Midnight? and all Eyes
Blind with the Pin and Web, but theirs; theirs only,
That would unseen be wicked? Is this nothing?
Why then the World, and all that is in it, is nothing,
The covering Sky is nothing, Bohemia nothing,
My Wife is nothing, nor Nothing have these Nothings,
If this be nothing.

Good my Lord, be cured
Of this diseased Opinion, and betimes,
For it is most dangerous.

Say it be, it is true.


No, no, my Lord.


It is: you lie, you lie:
I say thou lie Camillo, and I hate thee,
Pronounce thee a gross Lowt, a mindlesse Slave,
Or else a houering Temporizer, that
Can with thine eyes at once see good and evil,
Inclining to them both: were my Wives Liver
Infected (as her life) she would not live
The running of one Glass.

Who does infect her?


Why he that wears her like her Medull, hanging
About his neck (Bohemia) who, if I
Had Servants true about me, that bare eyes
To see alike mine Honor, as their Profits.
(Their own particular Thrifts) they would do that
Which should undo more doing: I, and thou
His Cup Bearer, whom I from meaner form
Have Bench'd, and reared to Worship, who may see
Plainly, as Heaven sees Earth* and Earth sees Heaven,
How I am galled, might be-spice a Cup,
To give mine Enemy a lasting Wink:
Which Draught to me, were cordial.

Sir (my Lord)
I could do this, and that with no rash Potion,
But with a lingering Dram, that should not work
Maliciously, like Poison: But I cannot
Believe this Crack to be in my dread Mistress
(So soueraignely being Honorable.)
I have loved thee.

Make that thy question, and go rot:
Do think I am so muddy, so unsettled,
To appoint my self in this vexation?
Su^ly the purity and whiteness of my Sheets
(Which to preserve, is Sleep; which being spotted,
Is Go^es, Thorns Nettles, Tails of Waspes)
Give scandal to the blood of the Prince, my Son,
(Who I do think is mine, and Jove as mine)
Without ripe moving to it? Would I do this?
Could man so blench?

I must believe you (Sir)
I do, and will fetch off Bohemia for it:
Provided, that when he is removed, your Highness
Will take again your Queen, as yours at first,
Even for your Sons sake, and thereby for sealing
The Injury of Tongues, in Courts and Kingdoms
Known, and allied to yours.

Thou do advise me,
Even so as I mine own course have set down:
I Will give no blemish to her Honor, none.

My Lord,
Go then; and with a countenance as clear
As Friendship wears at Feasts, keep with Bohemia,
And with your Queen: I am his Cup Bearer,
If from me he have wholesome Beueridge,
Account me not your Servant.

This is all:
Do It, and thou have the one half of my heart;
Do It not, thou splitt'st thine own.

I Will do it, my Lord.


I will seem friendly, as thou have advised me.


O miserable Lady. But for me,
What case stand I in? I must be the poysoner
Of good Polixenes, and my ground to do it,
Is the obedience to a Master; one,
Who in Rebellion with himself, will have
All that are his, so too. To do this deed,
Promotion follows: If I could find example
Of thousand's that had struck anointed Kings,
And flourished after, Il'd not do it: But since
Nor Brass, nor Stone, nor Parchment bears not one,
Let Villainy it self forswear't. I must
Forsake the Court: to do it, or no, is certain
To me a breake-neck. Happy Star reign now,
Here comes Bohemia.

This is strange: Me thinks
My favor here begins to warpe. Not speak?
Good day Camillo.

Hayle most Royal Sir.


What is the News in the Court?


None rare (my Lord.)


The King has on him such a countenance,
As he had lost some Province, and a Region
Loved, as he loves himself: even now I met him
With customarie complement, when he
Wafting his eyes to the contrary, and falling
A Lip of much contempt, speedes from me, and
So leaves me, to consider what is breeding,
That changes thus his Manners.

I dare not know (my Lord.)


How, dare not? do not? do you know, and dare not?
Be intelligent to me, it is thereabouts:
For to your self, what you do know, you must,
And cannot say, you dare not. Good Camillo,
Your changed complexions are to me a Mirror,
Which shows me mine changed too: for I must be
A party in this alteration, finding
My self thus altered with it.

There is a sickness
Which puts some of us in distemper, but
I cannot name the Disease, and it is caught
Of you, that yet are well.

How caught of me?
Make me not sighted like the Basilisque.
I have looked on thousands, who have sped the better
By my regard, but killed none so: Camillo,
As you are certainly a Gentleman, thereto
Clerke-like experienced, which no less adornes
Our Gentry, then our Parents Noble Names,
In whose success we are gentle: I beseech you,
If you know ought which does behoue my knowledge,
Thereof to be informed, imprison't not
In ignorant concealment.

I may not answer.


A Sickness caught of me, and yet I well?
I must be answered. Do thou hear Camillo,
I conjure thee, by all the parts of man,
Which Honor does acknowledge, whereof the least
Is not this Suit of mine, that thou declare
What incidencie thou do guess of harm
Is creeping toward me; how far off, how near,
Which way to be prevented, if to be:
If not, how best to bear it.

Sir, I will tell you,
Since I am charged in Honor, and by him
That I think Honorable: therefore mark my counsel,
Which must be even as swiftly followed, as
I mean to utter it; or both your self, and me,
Cry lost, and so good night.

On, good Camillo.


I am appointed him to murder you.


By whom, Camillo?


By the King.


For what?


He thinks, nay with all confidence he swears,
As he had seen't, or been an Instrument
To vice you to it, that you have touched his Queen
Forbiddenly.

Oh then, my best blood turn
To an infected Gelly, and my Name
Be yoked with his, that did betray the Best:
Turn then my freshest Reputation to
A savor, that may strike the dullest Nosthrill
Where I arrive, and my approach be shunned,
Nay hated too, worse then the great'st Infection
That ere was heard, or read.

Swear his thought over
By each particular Star in Heaven, and
By all their Influences; you may as well
Forbid the Sea for to obey the Moon,
As (or by Oath) remove, or (Counsel) shake
The Fabric of his Folly, whose foundation
Is pyl'd upon his Faith, and will continue
The standing of his Body.

How should this grow?


I know not: but I am sure it is safer to
Avoid what is grown, then question how it is borne.
If therefore you dare trust my honesty,
That lies enclosed in this Trunk, which you
Shall bear along impawnd, away to Night,
Your Followers I will whisper to the Business,
And will by twoes, and threes, at several Posternes,
Clear them of the City: For my self, I Will put
My fortunes to your service (which are here
By this discovery lost.) Be not uncertain,
For by the honor of my Parents, I
Have vttred Truth: which if you seek to prove,
I dare not stand by; nor shall you be safer,
Then one condemnd by the Kings own mouth:
Thereon his Execution sworn.

I do believe thee:
I saw his heart in's face. Give me thy hand,
Be Pilot to me, and thy places shall
Still neighbor mine. My Ships are ready, and
My people did expect my hence departure
Two days ago. This Jealousy
Is for a precious Creature: as she is rare,
Must it be great; and, as his Person's mighty,
Must it be violent: and, as he does conceive,
He is dishonored by a man, which ever
Professed to him: why his Reuenges must
In that be made more bitter. Fear ore-shades me:
Good Expedition be my friend, and comfort
The gracious Queen, part of his Theme; but nothing
Of his ill-ta'ne suspicion. Come Camillo,
I will respect thee as a Father, if
Thou bear my life off, hence: Let us avoid.

It is in mine authority to command
The Keys of all the Posternes: Please your Highness
To take the urgent hour. Come Sir, away.

Take the Boy to you: he so troubles me,
It Is past enduring.

Come (my gracious Lord)
Shall I be your play-fellow?

No, I Will none of you.


Why (my sweet Lord?)


You Will kiss me hard, and speak to me, as if
I were a Baby still. I love you better.

And why so (my Lord?)


Not for because
Your Brows are blacker (yet black-browes they say
Become some Women best, so that there be not
Too much hair there, but in a Cemicircle,
Or a halfe-Moone, made with a Pen.)

Who taught 'this?


I learned it out of Women's faces: pray now,
What color are your eyebrows?

Blew (my Lord.)


Nay, that is a mock: I have seen a Ladies Nose
That has been blew, but not her eyebrows.

Hark ye,
The Queen (your Mother) rounds apace: we shall
Present our services to a fine new Prince
One of these days, and then youl'd wanton with us,
If we would have you.

She is spread of late
Into a goodly Bulk (good time encounter her.)

What wisdom stirs amongst you? Come Sir, now
I am for you again: 'Pray you sit by us,
And tell's a Tale.

Merry, or sad, shal't be?


As merry as you will.


A sad Tale's best for Winter:
I have one of Sprights, and Goblins.

Let Us have that (good Sir.)
Come-on, sit down, come-on, and do your best,
To fright me with your Sprights: you're powrefull at it.

There was a man.


Nay, come sit down: then on.


Dwelt by a Churchyard: I will tell it softly,
Yond Crickets shall not hear it.

Come on then, and giu't me in mine care.


Was he met there? his Train? Camillo with him?


Behind the tuft of Pines I met them, never
Saw I men scowre so on their way: I eyed them
Even to their Ships.

How blessed am I
In my just Censure? in my true Opinion?
Alack, for lesser knowledge, how accursed,
In being so blessed? There may be in the Cup
A Spider steeped, and one may drink; depart,
And yet partake no venom: (for his knowledge
Is not infected) but if one present
The abhorred Ingredient to his eye, make known
How he has drunk, he cracks his gorge, his sides
With violent Hefts: I have drunk, and seen the Spider.
Camillo was his help in this, his Pandar:
There is a Plot against my Life, my Crown;
All Is true that is mistrusted: that false Villain,
Whom I employed, was pre-employ'd by him:
He has discovered my Design, and I
Remain a pinched Thing; yea, a very Trick
For them to play at will: how came the Posternes
So easily open?

By his great authority,
Which often has no less prevailed, then so,
On your command.

I know it too well.
Give me the Boy, I am glad you did not nurse him:
Though he does bear some signs of me, yet you
Have too much blood in him.

What is this? Sport?


Bear the Boy hence, he shall not come about her,
Away with him, and let her sport her self
With that she is big-with, for it is Polixenes
Has made thee swell thus.

But Il'd say he had not;
And I Will be sworn you would believe my saying,
How e're you leave to the Nay-ward.

You (my Lords)
Look on her, mark her well: be but about
To say she is a goodly Lady, and
The justice of your hearts will thereto add
It Is pity she is not honest: Honorable;
Praise her but for this her without-dore-Forme,
(Which on my faith deserves high speech) and straight
The Shrug, the Hum, or Ha, (these Petty-brands
That Calumny does use; Oh, I am out,
That Mercy does, for Calumny will fear
Virtue it self) these Shrugs, these Hum's, and Has,
When you have said she is goodly, come between,
Ere you can say she is honest: But be it known
(From him that has most cause to grieve it should be)
She Is an Adultresse.

Should a Villain say so,
(The most replenished Villain in the World)
He were as much more Villain: you (my Lord)
Do but mistake.

You have mistook (my Lady)
Polixenes for Leontes: O thou Thing,
(Which I Will not call a Creature of thy place,
Least Barbarism (making me the precedent)
Should a like Language use to all degrees,
And mannerly distinguishment leave out,
Betwixt the Prince and Beggar:) I have said
She Is an Adultresse, I have said with whom:
More; she is a Traitor, and Camillo is
A Federarie with her, and one that knows
What she should shame to know her self,
But with her most vild Principal: that she is
A Bed-swaruer, even as bad as those
That Vulgars give bold'st Titles; I, and privy
To this their late escape.

No (by my life)
Privy to none of this: how will this grieve you,
When you shall come to clearer knowledge, that
You thus have published me? Gentle my Lord.
You scarce can right me thoroughly, then, to say
You did mistake.

No: if I mistake
In those Foundations which I build upon,
The Center is not big enough to bear
A Schoole-Boyes Top. Away with her, to Prison:
He who shall speak for her, is a farre-off guilty,
But that he speaks.

There Is some ill Planet reigns:
I must be patient, till the Heavens look
With an aspect more favorable. Good my Lords,
I am not prone to weeping (as our Sex
Commonly are) the want of which vain dew
Perchance shall dry your pitties: but I have
That honorable Grief lodged here, which burns
Worse then Tears drown: beseech you all (my Lords)
With thoughts so qualified, as your Charities
Shall best instruct you, measure me; and so
The Kings will be performed.

Shall I be heard?


Who is it that goes with me? beseech your Highness
My Women may be with me, for you see
My plight requires it. Do not weep (good Fools)
There is no cause: When you shall know your Mistress
Has deserved Prison, then abound in Tears,
As I come out; this Action I now go on,
Is for my better grace. Adieu (my Lord)
I never wished to see you sorry, now
I trust I shall: my Women come, you have leave.

Go, do our bidding: hence.


Beseech your Highness call the Queen again.


Be certain what you do (Sir) least your Justice
Prove violence, in the which three great ones suffer,
Your Self, your Queen, your Son.

For her (my Lord)
I dare my life lay down, and will do it (Sir)
Please you to accept it, that the Queen is spotless
IN the eyes of Heaven, and to you (I mean
In this, which you accuse her.)

If it prove
She Is otherwise, I Will keep my Stables where
I lodge my Wife, I Will go in couples with her:
Then when I feel, and see her, no farther trust her:
For every ynch of Woman in the World,
I, every dram of Woman's flesh is false,
If she be.

Hold your peaces.


Good my Lord.


It is for you we speak, not for our selves:
You are abused, and by some putter on,
That will be damned for it: would I knew the Villain,
I would Land-damne him: be she honor-flaw'd,
I have three daughters: the eldest is eleven;
The second, and the third, nine: and some five:
If this prove true, they will pay for it. By mine Honor
I Will gell'd em all: fourteen they shall not see
To bring false generations: they are co-heyres,
And I had rather glib my self, then they
Should not produce fair issue.

Cease, no more:
You smell this business with a sense as cold
As is a dead-mans nose: but I do see it, and feel't,
As you feel doing thus: and see withal
The Instruments that feel.

If it be so,
We need no grave to bury honesty,
There Is not a grain of it, the face to sweeten
Of the whole dungy-earth.

What? lack I credit?


I had rather you did lack then I (my Lord)
Upon this ground: and more it would content me
To have her Honor true, then your suspicion
Be blamed for it how you might.

Why what need we
Commune with you of this? but rather follow
Our forcefull instigation? Our prerogative
Calls not your Counsels, but our natural goodness
Imparts this: which, if you, or stupefied,
Or seeming so, in skill, cannot, or will not
Relish a truth, like us: inform your selves,
We need no more of your advice: the matter,
The loss, the gain, the ord'ring on it,
Is all properly ours*

And I wish (my Liege)
You had only in your silent judgment tried it,
Without more ouerture.

How could that be?
Either thou art most ignorant by age,
Or thou were borne a fool: Camillo's flight
Added to their Familiarity
(Which was as gross, as ever touched conjecture,
That lacked sight only, naught for approbation
But only seeing, all other circumstances
Made up to 'th deed) does push-on this proceeding.
Yet, for a greater confirmation
(For in an Act of this importance, 'twere
Most pitteous to be wild) I have dispatched in post,
To sacred Delphos, to Appollo's Temple,
Cleomines and Dion, whom you know
Of stuff'd-sufficiency: Now, from the Oracle
They will bring all, whose spiritual counsel had
Shall stop, or spur me. Have I done well?

Well done (my Lord.)


Though I am satisfide, and need no more
Then what I know, yet shall the Oracle
Give rest to the minds of others; such as he
Whose ignorant credulity, will not
Come up to the truth. So have we thought it good
From our free person, she should be confinde,
Least that the treachery of the two, fled hence,
Be left her to perform. Come follow us,
We are to speak in public: for this business
Will raise us all.

To laughter, as I take it,
If the good truth, were known.

The Keeper of the prison, call to him:
Let him have knowledge who I am. Good Lady,
No Court in Europe is too good for thee,
What do thou then in prison? Now good Sir,
You know me, do you not?

For a worthy Lady,
And one, who much I honor.

Pray you then,
Conduct me to the Queen.

I may not (Madam)
To the contrary I have express commandment.

Here Is a-do, to lock up honesty and honor from
The access of gentle visitors. Is It lawful pray you
To see her Women? Any of them? Emilia?

So please you (Madam)
To put apart these your attendants, I
Shall bring Emilia forth.

I pray now call her:
Withdraw your selves.

And Madam,
I must be present at your Conference.

Well: be it so: prithee.
Here Is such a-doe, to make no stain, a stain,
As passes coloring. Dear Gentlewoman,
How fares our gracious Lady?

As well as one so great, and so forlorn
May hold together: On her frights, and greefes
(Which never tender Lady has borne greater)
She is, something before her time, delivered.

A boy?


A daughter, and a goodly babe,
Lusty, and like to live: the Queen receives
Much comfort in it: Says, my poor prisoner,
I am innocent as you,

I dare be sworn:
These dangerous, unsafe Lunes in the King, beshrew them:
He must be told on it, and he shall: the office
Becomes a woman best. I Will take it upon me,
If I prove hony-mouth'd, let my tongue blister.
And never to my red-look'd Anger be
The Trumpet any more: pray you (Emilia)
Commend my best obedience to the Queen,
If she dares trust me with her little babe,
I Will shew't the King, and undertake to be
Her Advocate to the lowd'st. We do not know
How he may soften at the sight of the Child:
The silence often of pure innocence
Persuades, when speaking fails.

Most worthy Madam,
your honor, and your goodness is so evident,
That your free undertaking cannot miss
A thriuing issue: there is no Lady living
So meet for this great errand; please your Ladyship
To visit the next room, I Will presently
Acquaint the Queen of your most noble offer,
Who, but to day hammered of this design,
But durst not tempt a minister of honor
Least she should be denied.

Tell her (Emilia)
I Will use that tongue I have: If wit flow from't
As boldness from my bosom, le't not be doubted
I shall do good.

Now be you blessed for it.
I Will to the Queen: please you come something nearer.

Madam, if it please the Queen to send the babe,
I know not what I shall incur, to pass it,
Having no warrant.

You need not fear it (sir)
This Child was prisoner to the womb, and is
By Law and process of great Nature, thence
Freed, and enfranchised, not a party to
The anger of the King, nor guilty of
(If any be) the trespass of the Queen.

I do believe it.


Do not you fear: upon mine honor, I^
Will stand betwixt you, and danger.

Nor night, nor day, no rest: It is but weakness
To bear the matter thus: mere weakness, if
The cause were not in being: part of the cause,
She, the Adultresse: for the harlot-King
Is quite beyond mine Arm, out of the blanke
And level of my brain: plot-proofe: but she,
I can hook to me: say that she were gone,
Given to the fire, a moity of my rest
Might come to me again. Whose there?

My Lord.


How does the boy?


He took good rest to night: it is hoped
His sickness is discharged.

To see his Nobleness,
Conceyuing the dishonor of his Mother.
He straight declined, drooped, took it deeply,
Fastened, and fixed the shame on it in himself:
Threw-off his Spirit, his Appetite, his Sleep,
And downright languish'd. Leave me solely: go,
See how he fares: Fie, fie, no thought of him,
The very thought of my Reuenges that way
Recoyle upon me: in himself too mighty,
And in his parties, his Alliance; Let him be,
Until a time may serve. For present vengeance
Take it on her: Camillo, and Polixenes
Laugh at me: make their pastime at my sorrow:
They should not laugh, if I could reach them, nor
Shall she, within my power.

You must not enter.


Nay rather (good my Lords) be second to me:
Fear you his tyrannous passion more (alas)
Then the Queens life? A gracious innocent soul,
More free, then he is jealous.

That Is enough.


Madam; he has not slept to night, commanded
None should come at him.

Not so hot (good Sir)
I come to bring him sleep. It Is such as you
That creep like shadows by him, and do sighe
At each his needless heauings: such as you
Nourish the cause of his awaking. I
Do come with words, as medicinal, as true;
(Honest, as either;) to purge him of that humor,
That presses him from sleep.

Who noise there, hoe?


No noise (my Lord) but needful conference,
About some Gossips for your Highness.

How?
Away with that audacious Lady. Antigonus,
I charged thee that she should not come about me,
I knew she would.

I told her so (my Lord)
On your displeasures peril, and on mine,
She should not visit you.

What? can not rule her?


From all dishonestie he can: in this
(Unless he take the course that you have done)
Commit me, for committing honor, trust it,
He shall not rule me:

La-you now, you hear,
When she will take the rain, I let her run,
But she will not stumble.

Good my Liege, I come:
And I beseech you hear me, who professes
My self your loyal Servant, your Physician,
Your most obedient Counsailor: yet that dares
Less appear so, in comforting your Euilles,
Then such as most seem yours. I say, I come
From your good Queen.

Good Queen?


Good Queen (my Lord) good Queen,
I say good Queen,
And would by combat, make her good so, were I
A man, the worst about you.

Force her hence.


Let him that makes but trifles of his eyes
First hand me: on mine own accord, I Will off,
But first, I Will do my errand. The good Queen
(For she is good) has brought you forth a daughter,
Here it is: Commends it to your blessing.

Out:
A mankind Witch? Hence with her, out o'dore:
A most intelligencing bawd.

Not so:
I am as ignorant in that, as you,
In so entit'ling me: and no less honest
Then you are mad: which is enough, I Will warrant
(As this world goes) to pass for honest:

Traitors;
Will you not push her out? Give her the Bastard,
Thou dotard, thou art woman-tyr'd: vnroosted
By thy dame Partlet here. Take up the Bastard,
Take It up, I say: giue't to thy Croane.

For ever
Vnvenerable be thy hands, if thou
Take up the Princess, by that forced baseness
Which he has put upon it.

He dreads his Wife.


So I would you did: then 'twere past all doubt
Youl'd call your children, yours.

A nest of Traitors.


I am none, by this good light.


Nor I: nor any
But one that is here: and that is himself: for he,
The sacred Honor of himself, his Queens,
His hopeful Sons, his Babes, betrays to Slander,
Whose sting is sharper then the Swords; and will not
(For as the case now stands, it is a Curse
He cannot be compelled to it) once remove
The Root of his Opinion, which is rotten,
As ever Oak, or Stone was sound.

A Callat
Of boundless tongue, who late has beat her Husband,
And now bayts me: This Brat is none of mine,
It is the Issue of Polixenes,
Hence with it, and together with the Dam,
Commit them to the fire.

It is yours:
And might we l^y the old Proverb to your charge,
So like you, it is the worse. Behold (my Lords)
Although the Print be little, the whole Matter
And Copy of the Father: (Eye, Nose, Lip,
The trick of's Frown, his Forehead, nay, the Valley,
The pretty dimples of his Chin, and Cheek; his Smiles:
The very Mold, and frame of Hand, Nail, Finger.)
And thou good Goddess Nature, which have made it
So like to him that got it, if thou have
The ordering of the Mind too, amongst all Colors
No Yellow in it, least she suspect, as he does,
Her Children, not her Husbands.

A gross Hagge:
And Lozell, thou art worthy to be hanged,
That wilt not stay her Tongue.

Hang all the Husbands
That cannot do that Feat, you will leave your self
Hardly one Subject.

Once more take her hence.


A most unworthy, and unnatural Lord
Can do no more.

I Will h^' thee burnt.


I care not:
It is an Heretic that makes the fire,
Not she which burns in it. I Will not call you Tyrant:
But this most cruel usage of your Queen
(Not able to produce more accusation
Then your own weake-hindg'd Fancy) something sauors
Of Tyranny, and will ignoble make you,
Yea, scandalous to the World.

On your Allegiance,
Out of the Chamber with her. Were I a Tyrant,
Where were her life? she durst not call me so,
If she did know me one, Away with her.

I pray you do not push me, I Will be gone.
Look to your Babe (my Lord) it is yours: Jove send her
A better guiding Spirit. What needs these hands?
You that are thus so tender over his Follyes,
Will never do him good, not one of you.
So, so: Farewell, we are gone.

Thou (Traitor) have set on thy Wife to this.
My Child? away with it? even thou, that have
A heart so tender over it, take it hence,
And see it instantly consumed with fire.
Even thou, and none but thou. Take it up straight:
Within this hour bring me word it is done,
(And by good testimony) or I Will seize thy life,
With what thou else call'st thine: if thou refuse,
And wilt encounter with my Wrath, say so;
The Bastard-braynes with these my proper hands
Shall I dash out. Go, take it to the fire,
For thou sett'st on thy Wife.

I did not, Sir:
These Lords, my Noble Fellows, if they please,
Can clear me in it.

We can: my Royal Liege,
He is not guilty of her coming hither.

You're liars all.


Beseech your Highness, give us better credit:
We have always truly served you, and beseech'
So to esteem of us: and on our knees we beg,
(As recompense of our dear services
Past, and to come) that you do change this purpose,
Which being so horrible, so bloody, must
Lead on to some foul Issue. We all kneel.

I am a Feather for each Wind that blows:
Shall I live on, to see this Bastard kneel,
And call me Father? better burn it now,
Then curse it then. But be it: let it live.
It shall not neither. You Sir, come you hither:
You that have been so tenderly officious
With Lady Margerie, your Midwife there,
To save this Bastards life; for it is a Bastard,
So sure as this Beard's gray. What will you adventure,
To save this Brats life?

Any thing (my Lord)
That my ability may undergo,
And Nobleness impose: at least thus much;
I Will pawn the little blood which I have left,
To save the Innocent: any thing possible.

It shall be possible: Swear by this Sword
Thou will perform my bidding.

I will (my Lord.)


Mark, and perform it: see thou? for the fail
Of any point in it, shall not only be
Death to thy self, but to thy lewd-tongu'd Wife,
(Whom for this time we pardon) We enjoin thee,
As thou art Liege-man to us, that thou carry
This female Bastard hence, and that thou bear it
To some remote and desert place, quite out
Of our Dominions; and that there thou leave it
(Without more mercy) to it own protection,
And favor of the Climate: as by strange fortune
It came to us, I do in Justice charge thee,
On thy Souls peril, and thy Bodies torture,
That thou commend it strangely to some place,
Where Chance may nurse, or end it: take it up.

I swear to do this: though a present death
Had been more merciful. Come on (poor Babe)
Some powerful Spirit instruct the Kytes and Ravens
To be thy Nurses. Wolves and Bears, they say,
(Casting their savageness aside) have done
Like offices of Pity. Sir, be prosperous
In more then this deed does require; and Blessing
Against this Cruelty, fight on thy side
(Poor Thing, condemned to loss.)

No: I Will not rear
Another Issue.

Please' your Highness, Posts
From those you sent to the Oracle, are come
An hour since: Cleomines and Dion,
Being well arrived from Delphos, are both landed,
Hasting to the Court.

So please you (Sir) their speed
Has been beyond account.

Twenty three days
They have been absent: it is good speed: fore-tells
The great Apollo suddenly will have
The truth of this appear: Prepare you Lords,
Summon a Session, that we may arraigne
Our most ^sloyall Lady* for as she has
Been publicly accused, so shall she have
A just and open Trial. While she lives,
My heart will be a burden to me. Leave me,
And think upon my bidding.

The Clymat's delicate, the Air most sweet,
Fertile the Isle, the Temple much surpassing
The common praise it bears.

I shall report,
For most it caught me, the Celestial Habits,
(Me thinks I so should term them) and the reverence
Of the grave Wearers. O, the Sacrifice,
How ceremonious, solemn, and vn-earthly
It was in the Offering?

But of all, the burst
And the eare-deaff^ning Voice of the Oracle,
Kin to Jove's Thunder, so surpised my Sense,
That I was nothing.

It the event of the Journey
Prove as successful to the Queen (O be it so)
As it has been to us, rare, pleasant, speedy,
The time is worth the use on it.

Great Apollo
Turn all to the best: these Proclamations,
So forcing faults upon Hermione,
I little like.

The violent carriage of it
Will clear, or end the Business, when the Oracle
(Thus by Apollo's great Divine sealed up)
Shall the Contents discover: something rare
Even then will rush to knowledge. Go: fresh Horses,
And gracious be the issue.

This Sessions (to our great grief we pronounce)
Even pushes against our heart. The party tried,
The Daughter of a King, our Wife, and one
Of us too much beloved. Let us be cleared
Of being tyrannous, since we so openly
Proceed in Justice, which shall have due course,
Even to the Guilt, or the Purgation:
Produce the Prisoner.

It is his Highness pleasure, that the Queen
Appear in person, here in Court.

Read the Indictment.


Hermione, Queen to the worthy Leontes, King of Sicilia, thou art here accused
and arraigned of High Treason, in committing Adultery with Polixenes King of
Bohemia, and conspiring with Camillo to take away the Life of our Sovereign
Lord the King, thy Royal Husband: the pretense whereof being by circumstances
partly laid open, thou (Hermione) contrary to the Faith and Allegiance of a
true Subject* did counsel and aid them, for their better safety, to fly
away by Night


Since what I am to say, must be but that
Which contradicts my Accusation, and
The testimony on my part, no other
But what comes from my self, it shall scarce boot me
To say, Not guilty* mine Integrity
Being counted Falsehood, shall (as I express it)
Be so received. But thus, if Powers Divine
Behold our humane Actions (as they do)
I doubt not then, but Innocence shall make
False Accusation blush, and Tyranny
Tremble at Patience. You (my Lord) best know
(Whom least will seem to do so) my past life
Has been as continent, as chaste, as true,
As I am now unhappy; which is more
Then History can pattern, though devised,
And played, to take Spectators. For behold me,
A Fellow of the Royal Bed, which owe
A Moitie of the Throne: a great Kings Daughter,
The Mother to a hopeful Prince, here standing
To prate and talk for Life, and Honor, fore
Who please to come, and hear. For Life, I prize it
As I weigh Grief (which I would spare:) For Honor,
It Is a deriuatiue from me to mine,
And only that I stand for. I appeal
To your own Conscience (Sir) before Polixenes
Came to your Court, how I was in your grace,
How merited to be so: Since he came,
With what encounter so vncurrant, I
Have strayn'd to appear thus; if one jot beyond
The bound of Honor, or in act, or will
That way enclining, hardened be the hearts
Of all that hear me, and my neer'st of Kin
Cry fie upon my Grave.

I never heard yet,
That any of these bolder Vices wanted
Less Impudence to gainsay what they did,
Then to perform it first.

That Is true enough,
Though it is a saying (Sir) not due to me.

You will not own it.


More then Mistress of,
Which comes to me in name of Fault, I must not
At all acknowledge. For Polixenes
(With whom I am accused) I do confess
I loved him, as in Honor he required:
With such a kind of Love, as might become
A Lady like me; with a Love, even such,
So, and no other, as your self commanded:
Which, not to have done, I think had been in me
Both Disobedience, and Ingratitude
To you, and toward your Friend, whose Love had spoke,
Even since it could speak, from an Infant, freely,
That it was yours. Now for Conspiracy,
I know not how it tastes, though it be dish'd
For me to try how: All I know of it,
Is, that Camillo was an honest man;
And why he left your Court, the Gods themselves
(Wotting no more then I) are ignorant.

You knew of his departure, as you know
What you have vnderta'ne to do in's absence.

Sir,
You speak a Language that I understand not:
My Life stands in the level of your Dreams,
Which I Will lay down.

Your Actions are my Dreams.
You had a Bastard by Polixenes,
And I but dreamed it: As you were past all shame,
(Those of your Fact are so) so past all truth;
Which to deny, concerns more then auailes: for as
Thy Brat has been cast out, like to it self,
No Father owning it (which is indeed
More criminal in thee, then it) so thou
Shall feel out Justice; in whose easiest passage,
Look for no less then death.

Sir, spare your Threats:
The Bugge which you would fright me with, I seek:
To me can Life be no commodity;
The crown and comfort of my Life (your Favor)
I do give lost, for I do feel it gone,
But know not how it went. My second Joy,
And first Fruits of my body, from his presence
I am barred, like one infectious. My third comfort
(Star'd most unluckily) is from my breast
(The innocent milk in it most innocent mouth)
Haled out to murder. My self on every Post
Proclaym'd a Strumpet: With immodest hatred
The Childbed privilege denied, which longs
To Women of all fashion. Lastly, horried
Here, to this place, in the open air, before
I have got strength of limit. Now (my Liege)
Tell me what blessings I have here alive,
That I should fear to die? Therefore proceed:
But yet hear this: mistake me not: no Life,
(I prize it not a straw) but for mine Honor,
Which I would free: if I shall be condemned
Upon surmizes (all proofs sleeping else,
But what your Iealousies awake) I tell you
It Is Rigor, and not Law Your Honors all,
I do refer me to the Oracle:
Apollo be my Judge.

This your request
Is altogether just: therefore bring forth
(And in Apollo's Name) his Oracle.

The Emperor of Russia was my Father.
Oh that he were alive, and here beholding
His Daughters Trial: that he did but see
The flatnesse of my misery; yet with eyes
Of Pity, not Revenge.

You here shall swear upon this Sword of Justice,
That you ( Cleomines and Dion) have
Been both at Delphos, and from thence have brought
This seal'd-vp Oracle, by the Hand delivered
Of great Apollo's Priest; and that since then,
You have not dared to break the holy Seal,
Nor read the Secrets in it.

All this we swear.


Break up the Seals, and read.


Hermione is chaste, Polixenes blameless, Camillo a true Subject, Leontes a
jealous Tyrant, his innocent Babe truly begotten, and the King shall live
without an Heir, if that which is lost, be not found


Now blessed be the great Apollo.


Praised.


Have thou read truth?


I (my Lord) even so as it is here set down.


There is no truth at all in the Oracle:
The Sessions shall proceed: this is mere falsehood.

My Lord the King: the King?


What is the business?


O Sir, I shall be hated to report it.
The Prince your Son, with mere conceit, and fear
Of the Queens speed, is gone.

How? gone?


Is dead.


Apollo's angry, and the Heavens themselves
Do strike at my Injustice. How now there?

This news is mortal to the Queen: Look down
And see what Death is doing.

Take her hence:
Her heart is but o're-charg'd: she will recover.
I have too much believed mine own suspicion:
'Beseech you tenderly apply to her
Some remedies for life. Apollo pardon
My great profaneness against thine Oracle.
I Will reconcile me to Polixenes,
New woe my Queen, recall the good Camillo
(Whom I proclaim a man of Truth, of Mercy:)
For being transported by my Iealousies
To bloody thoughts, and to revenge, I chose
Camillo for the minister, to poison
My friend Polixenes: which had been done,
But that the good mind of Camillo tardied
My swift command: though I with Death, and with
Reward, did threaten and encourage him,
Not doing it, and being done: he (most humane,
And filled with Honor) to my Kingly Guest
Vnclasp'd my practice, quit his fortunes here
(Which you knew great) and to the hazard
Of all Incertainties, himself commended,
No richer then his Honor: How he glisters
Through my Rust? and how his Piety
Does my deeds make the blacker?

Woe the while:
O cut my Lace, least my heart (cracking it)
Break too.

What fit is this? good Lady?


What studied torments (Tyrant) have for me?
What Wheels? Racks? Fires? What flaying? boiling?
In Leads, or Oils? What old, or newer Torture
Must I receive? whose every word deserves
To taste of thy most worst. Thy Tyranny
(Together working with thy Iealousies,
Fancies too weak for Boys, too green and idle
For Girls of Nine) O think what they have done,
And then run mad indeed: starke-mad: for all
Thy bygone fooleries were but spices of it.
That thou betrayed'st Polixenes, 'twas nothing,
(That did but show thee, of a Fool, inconstant,
And damnable ungrateful:) Nor was it much,
Thou would have poisoned good Camillo's Honor,
To have him kill a King: poor Trespasses,
More monstrous standing by: whereof I reckon
The casting forth to Crows, thy Baby-daughter,
To be or none, or little; though a Devil
Would have shed water out of fire, ere don't:
Nor is it directly laid to thee the death
Of the young Prince, whose honorable thoughts
(Thoughts high for one so tender) cleft the heart
That could conceive a gross and foolish Sire
Blemished his gracious Dam: this is not, no,
Laid to thy answer: but the last: O Lords,
When I have said, cry woe: the Queen, the Oueene,
The sweet'st, deer'st creature's dead: and vengeance for it
Not dropped down yet.

The higher powers forbid.


I say she is dead: I Will swear't. If word, nor oath
Prevail not, go and see: if you can bring
Tincture, or luster in her lip, her eye
Heat outwardly, or breath within, I Will serve you
As I would do the Gods. But, O thou Tyrant,
Do not repent these things, for they are heavier
Then all thy woes can stir: therefore betake thee
To nothing but despair. A thousand knees,
Ten thousand years together, naked, fasting,
Upon a barren Mountain, and still Winter
In storm perpetual, could not move the Gods
To look that way thou were.

Go on, go on:
Thou can not speak too much, I have deserved
All tongues to talk their bittrest.

Say no more;
How ere the business goes, you have made fault
I 'th boldness of your speech.

I am sorry for it;
All faults I make, when I shall come to know them,
I do repent: Alas, I have showed too much
The rashness of a woman: he is touched
To the Noble heart. What Is gone, and what is past help
Should be past grief: Do not receive affliction
At my petition; I beseech you, rather
Let me be punished, that have minded you
Of what you should forget. Now (good my Liege)
Sir, Royal Sir forgive a foolish woman:
The love I bore your Queen (Lo, fool again)
I Will speak of her no more, nor of your Children:
I Will not remember you of my own Lord,
(Who is lost too:) take your patience to you,
And I Will say nothing.

Thou did speak but well,
When most the truth: which I receive much better,
Then to be pitied of thee. Prithee bring me
To the dead bodies of my Queen, and Son,
One grave shall be for both: Upon them shall
The causes of their death appear (unto
Our shame perpetual) once a day, I Will visit
The Chapel where they lie, and tears shed there
Shall be my recreation. So long as Nature
Will bear up with this exercise, so long
I daily vow to use it. Come, and lead me
To these sorrows.

Thou art perfect then, our ship has touched upon
The Deserts of Bohemia.

I (my Lord) and fear
We have Landed in ill time: the skies look grimly,
And threaten present blusters. In my conscience
The heavens with that we have in hand, are angry,
And frown vpon's.

Their sacred wil's be done: go get a-boord,
Look to thy bark, I Will not be long before
I call upon thee.

Make your best haste, and go not
Too-farre in th Land: it is like to be loud weather,
Besides this place is famous for the Creatures
Of prey, that keep upon it.

Go thou away,
I Will follow instantly.

I am glad at heart
To be so rid of th business.

Come, poor babe;
I have heard (but not believed) the Spirits of the dead
May walk again: if such thing be, thy Mother
Appeared to me last night: for never was dream
So like a waking. To me comes a creature,
Sometimes her head on one side, some another,
I never saw a vessel of like sorrow
So filled, and so becoming: in pure white Robes
Like very sanctity she did approach
My Cabine where I lay: thrice bowed before me,
And (gasping to begin some speech) her eyes
Became two spouts; the fury spent, anon
Did this break from her. Good Antigonus,
Since Fate (against thy better disposition)
Has made thy person for the Thower-out
Of my poor babe, according to thine oath,
Places remote enough are in Bohemia,
There weep, and leave it crying: and for the babe
Is counted lost for ever, Perdita
I prithee called: For this ungentle business
Put on thee, by my Lord, thou never shall see
Thy Wife Paulina more: and so, with shrickes
She melted into Air. Affrighted much,
I did in time collect my self, and thought
This was so, and no slumber: Dreams, are toys,
Yet for this once, yea superstitiously,
I will be squared by this. I do believe
Hermione has suffered death, and that
Apollo would (this being indeed the issue
Of King Polixenes) it should here be laid
(Either for life, or death) upon the earth
Of it is right Father. Blossom, speed thee well,
There lie, and there thy charracter: there these,
Which may if Fortune please, both breed thee (pretty)
And still rest thine. The storm begins, poor wretch,
That for thy mothers fault, art thus exposed
To loss, and what may follow. Weep I cannot,
But my heart bleedes: and most accursed am I
To be by oath enioyn'd to this. Farewell,
The day frowns more and more: you are like to have
A lullabie too rough: I never saw
The heavens so dim, by day. A savage clamor?
Well may I get a-boord: This is the Chase,
I am gone for ever.

I would there were no age between ten and three and twenty, or that youth
would sleep out the rest: for there is nothing (in the between) but getting
wenches with child, wronging the Auncientry, stealing, fighting, hark you
now: would any but these boylde-braines of nineteen, and two and twenty hunt
this weather? They have scarr'd away two of my best Sheep, which I fear the
Wolf will sooner find then the Master; if any where I have them, it is by the
seaside, brouzing of Iuy* Good-lucke (and't be thy will) what have we here?
Mercy on's, a Barn? A very pretty barn; A boy, or a Child I wonder? (A
pretty one, a very pretty one) sure some Escape; Though I am not bookish* yet
I can read Waiting-Gentlewoman in the escape: this has been some staire-worke,
some Trunke-worke, some behinde-doore work: they were warmer that got this,
then the poor Thing is here. I Will take it up for pity, yet I Will tarry till my
son come: he hallowed but even now. Whoa-ho-hoa


Hilloa, loa.


What? art so near? If thou wilt see a thing to talk on, when thou art dead and
rotten, come hither: what ayl'st thou, man


I have seen two such sights, by Sea and by Land: but I am not to say it is a
Sea, for it is now the sky, betwixt the Firmament and it, you cannot thrust a
bodkins point


Why boy, how is it?


I would you did but see how it chases, how it rages, how it takes up the
shore, but that is not to the point: Oh, the most pitteous cry of the poor
souls, sometimes to see 'em, and not to see 'em: Now the Ship boaring the
Moon with her maine Mast, and anon swallowed with yest and froth, as you would
thrust a Cork into a hogshead. And then for the Land-seruice, to see how the
Bear tore out his shoulder bone, how he cride to me for help, and said his
name was Antigonus, a Nobleman: But to make an end of the Ship, to see how the
Sea flapdragon'd it: but first, how the poor souls roared, and the sea mocked
them: and how the poor Gentleman roared, and the Bear mocked him, both
roaring louder then the sea, or weather


Name of mercy, when was this boy?


Now, now: I have not winked since I saw these sights: the men are not yet cold
under water, nor the Bear half dined on the Gentleman: he is at it now


Would I had bin by, to have helped the old man.


I would you had been by the ship side, to have helped her; there your charity
would have lacked footing


Heavy matters, heavy matters: but look thee here boy. Now bless thy self:
thou met'st with things dying, I with things newborn Here Is a sight for thee:
Look thee, a bearing-cloath for a Squires child: look thee here, take up,
take up (Boy:) open't: so, let us see, it was told me I should be rich by the
Fairies. This is some Changeling: open't: what is within, boy


You're a mad old man: If the sins of your youth are forgiven you, you're
well to live. Gold, all Gold


This is Faiery Gold boy, and 'twill prove so: up with it, keep it close: home,
home, the next way. We are luckie (boy) and to be so still requires nothing
but secrecy. Let my sheep go: Come (good boy) the next way home


Go you the next way with your Findings, I Will go see if the Bear be gone from
the Gentleman, and how much he has eaten: they are never cursed but when they
are hungry: if there be any of him left, I Will bury it


That Is a good deed: if thou may discern by that which is left of him, what
he is, fetch me to the sight of him


'Marry will I: and you shall help to put him in the ground.


It Is a lucky day, boy, and we will do good deeds on it


I that please some, try all: both joy and terror
Of good, and bad: that makes, and unfolds error,
Now take upon me (in the name of Time)
To use my wings: Impute it not a crime
To me, or my swift passage, that I slide
Ore sixteen years, and leave the growth untried
Of that wide gap, since it is in my power
To orethrow Law, and in one selfe-borne hour
To plant, and ore-whelme Custom. Let me pass
The same I am, ere ancient'st Order was,
Or what is now received. I witness to
The times that brought them in, so shall I do
To the freshest things now reigning, and make stale
The glistering of this present, as my Tale
Now seems to it: your patience this allowing,
I turn my glass, and give my Scene such growing
As you had slept between: Leontes leaving
The effects of his fond iealousies, so greeuing
That he shuts up himself. Imagine me
(Gentle Spectators) that I now may be
In fair Bohemia, and remember well,
I mentioned a son of the Kings, which Florizell
I now name to you: and with speed so pace
To speak of Perdita, now grown in grace
Equal with wondering. What of her insues
I list not prophecy: but let Times news
Be known when it is brought forth. A shepherds daughter
And what to her adheres, which follows after,
Is the argument of Time: of this allow,
If ever you have spent time worse, ere now:
If never, yet that Time himself does say,
He wishes earnestly, you never may.

I pray thee (good Camillo) be no more importunate: it is a sickness denying
thee any thing: a death to grant this


It is fifteen years since I saw my Country: though I have (for the most
part) bin ayred abroad, I desire to lay my bones there. Besides, the penitent
King (my Master) has sent for me, to whose feeling sorrows I might be some
allay, or I oreweene to think so) which is another spur to my departure


As thou love me (Camillo) wipe not out the rest of thy services, by leaving
me now: the need I have of thee, thine owne^ goodness has made: better not
to have had thee, then thus to want thee, thou having made me Businesses,
(which none (without thee) can sufficiently manage) must either stay to execute
them thy self, or take away with thee the very services thou have done: which
if I have not enough considered (as too much I cannot) to be more thankful
to thee, shall be my study, and my profit therein, the heaping
friendshippes. Of that fatal Country Sicillia, prithee speak no more, whose
very naming, punnishes me with the remembrance of that penitent (as thou calst
him) and reconciled King my brother, whose loss of his most precious Queen
and Children, are even now to be a-fresh lamented. Say to me, when saw thou
the Prince Florizell my son? Kings are no less unhappy, their issue, not being
gracious, then they are in loosing them, when they have approved their Virtues


Sir, it is three days since I saw the Prince: what his happier affairs may
be, are to me unknown: but I have (missingly) noted, he is of late much
retired from Court, and is less frequent to his Princely exercises then
formerly he has appeared


I have considered so much (Camillo) and with some care, so far, that I have
eyes under my service, which look upon his remouednesse: from whom I have this
Intelligence, that he is seldom from the house of a most homely shepherd: a
man (they say) that from very nothing, and beyond the imagination of his
neighbors, is grown into an unspeakable estate


I have heard (sir) of such a man, who has a daughter of most rare note: the
report of her is extended more, then can be thought to begin from such a cottag


That Is likewise part of my Intelligence: but (I fear) the Angle that pluckes
our son thither. Thou shall accompany us to the place, where we will (not
appearing what we are) have some question with the shepherd; from whose
simplicity, I think it not uneasy to get the cause of my sons resort
thither. 'Prethe be my present partner in this business, and lay aside the
thoughts of Sicillia


I willingly obey your command.


My best Camillo, we must disguise our selves.


When Daffadils begin to peer,
With heigh the Doxy over the dale.
Why then comes in the sweet of the year,
For the red blood raigns in ye winters pale.
The white sheet bleaching on the hedge,
With boy the sweet birds, O how they sing:
Does set my pugging tooth an edge,
For a quart of Ale is a dish for a King.
The Lark that tirra Lyra chaunts,
With heigh, the Thrush and the Iay:
Are Summer songs for me and my Aunts
While we lie tumbling in the hay.
I have served Prince Florizell, and in my time wore three pile, but now I am
out of service

But shall I go mourn for that (my dear)
the pale Moon shines by night:
And when I wander here, and there
I then do most go right.
If Tinkers may have leave to live,
and bear the Sow-skin Bowget,
Then my account I well may give,
and in the Stocks auouch-it.
My Traffic is sheets: when the Kite builds, look to lesser Linne^. My
Father named me Autolicus, who being (as I am) lytter'd under Mercury, was
likewise a snapper-vp of unconsidered trifles: With Dye and drab, I purchased
this Caparison, and my Reuennew is the silly Cheat. Gallows, and Knock, are
too powerful on the Highway. Beating and hanging are terrors to me: For the
life to come, I sleep out the thought of it. A prize, a prize


Let me see, every Leauen-weather toddes, every tod yeeldes pound and odd
shilling: fifteen hundred shorn, what comes the wool too


If the sprindge hold, the Cocke's mine.


I cannot do it without Compters. Let me see, what am I to buy for our
Sheepe-shearing-Feast? Three pound of Sugar, five pound of Currence, Rice: What
will this sister of mine do with Rice? But my father has made her Mistress of
the Feast, and she lays it on. She has made-me four and twenty Nose-gayes
for the shearers (three-man song-men, all, and very good ones) but they are
most of them Means and Bases; but one Puritan amongst them, and he sings
Psalms to horne-pipes. I must have Saffron to color the Warden Pies, Mace:
Dates, none: that is out of my note: Nutmegges, seven; a Race or two of Ginger,
but that I may beg: Four pound of Prewyns, and as many of Reysons of th Sun


Oh, that ever I was borne.


IN the name of me.


Oh help me, help me: pluck but off these rags: and then, death, death.


Alack poor soul, thou have need of more rags to lay on thee, rather then
have these off


Oh sir, the loathsomeness of them offend me, more then the stripes I have
received, which are mighty ones and millions


Alas poor man, a million of beating may come to a great matter.


I am robbed sir, and beaten: my money, and apparel taken from me, and these
derestable things put upon me


What, by a horseman, or a footman?


A footman (sweet sir) a footman.


Indeed, he should be a footman, by the garments he has left with thee: If this
be a horsemans Coat, it has seen very hot service. Lend me thy hand, I Will
help thee. Come, lend me thy hand


Oh good sir, tenderly, oh.


Alas poor soul.


Oh good sir, softly, good sir: I fear (sir) my shoulder blade is out.


How now? Can stand?


Softly, dear sir: good sir, softly: you ha done me a charitable office.


Do lack any money? I have a little money for thee.


No, good sweet sir: no, I beseech you sir: I have a Kinsman not past three
quarters of a mile hence, unto whom I was going: I shall there have money, or
any thing I want: Offer me no money I pray you, that killes my heart


What manner of Fellow was he that robbed you?


A fellow (sir) that I have known to go about with Troll-my-dames: I knew him
once a servant of the Prince: I cannot tell good sir, for which of his Virtues
it was, but he was certainly Whipped out of the Court


His vices you would say: there is no virtue whipped out of the Court: they
cherish it to make it stay there; and yet it will no more but abide


Vices I would say (Sir.) I know this man well, he has been since an
Ape-bearer, then a Processe-seruer (a Bayliffe) then he compast a Motion of
the Prodigal son, and married a Tinkers wife, within a Mile where my Land
and Living lies; and (having flowne over many knauish professions) he settled
only in Rogue: some call him Autolicus


Out upon him: Prig, for my life Prig: he haunts Wakes, Faires, and
Beare-baitings


Very true sir: he sir he: that is the Rogue that put me into this apparel.


Not a more cowardly Rogue in all Bohemia; If you had but looked big, and
spit at him, hee'ld have run


I must confess to you (sir) I am no fighter: I am false of heart that way,
and that he knew I warrant him


How do you now?


Sweet sir, much better then I was: I can stand, and walk: I will even take my
leave of you, and pace softly toward my Kinsmans


Shall I bring thee on the way?


No, good faced sir, no sweet sir.


Then fartheewell, I must go buy Spices for our sheepe-shearing.


Prosper you sweet sir. Your purse is not hot enough to purchase your Spice:
I Will be with you at your sheepe-shearing too: If I make not this Cheat bring out
another, and the sheerers prove sheep, let me be vnrold, and my name put in
the book of Virtue

Iog-on, Iog-on, the foot-path way,
And merrily hent the Stile-a:
A merry heart goes all the day,
Your sad tyres in a Mile-a.

These your unusual weeds, to each part of you
Does give a life: no Shepherdess, but Flora
Peering in Aprils front. This your sheepe-shearing,
Is as a meeting of the petty Gods,
And you the Queen on it.

Sir: my gracious Lord,
To chide at your extremes, it not becomes me:
(Oh pardon, that I name them:) your high self
The gracious mark of the Land, you have obscured
With a Swains wearing: and me (poor lowly Maid)
Most Goddese-like prank'd up: But that our Feasts
In every Mess, have folly; and the Feeders
Digest with a Custom, I should blush
To see you so attyr'd: sworn I think,
To show my self a glass.

I bless the time,
When my good Falcon, made her flight a-crosse
Thy Fathers ground

Now Jove afford you cause:
To me the difference forges dread (your Greatness
Has not been used to fear:) even now I tremble
To think your Father, by some accident
Should pass this way, as you did: Oh the Pates,
How would he look, to see his work, so noble,
Vildely bound up? What would he say? Or how
Should I (in these my borrowed Flaunts) behold
The sternnesse of his presence?

Apprehend
Nothing but iollity: the Gods themselves
(Humbling their Deities to love) have taken
The shapes of Beasts upon them. Jupiter,
Became a Bull, and bellowed: the green Neptune
A Ram, and bleated: and the Fire-roab'd-God
Golden Apollo, a poor humble Swain,
As I seem now. Their transformations,
Were never for a piece of beauty, rarer,
Not in a way so chaste: since my desires
Run not before mine honor: nor my Lusts
Burn hotter then my Faith.

O but Sir,
Your resolution cannot hold, when it is
Opposed (as it must be) by the power of the King:
One of these two must be necessities,
Which then will speak, that you must change this purpose,
Or I my life.

Thou deer'st Perdita,
With these forced thoughts, I prithee darken not
The Mirth of the Feast: Or I Will be thine (my Fair)
Or not my Fathers. For I cannot be
Mine own, nor any thing to any, if
I be not thine. To this I am most constant,
Though destiny say no. Be merry (Gentle)
Strangle such thoughts as these, with any thing
That you behold the while. Your guests are coming:
Lift up your countenance, as it were the day
Of celebration of that nuptial, which
We two have sworn shall come.

O Lady Fortune,
Stand you auspicious.

See, your Guests approach,
Address your self to entertain them sprightly,
And let us be red with mirth.

Fie (daughter) when my old wife lived: upon
This day, she was both Pantler, Butler, Cook,
Both Dame and Servant: Welcomed all: served all,
Would sing her song, and dance her turn: now here
At upper end of th Table; now, in th middle:
On his shoulder, and his: her face of fire
With labor, and the thing she took to quench it
She would to each one sip. You are retired,
As if you were a feasted one: and not
The Hostess of the meeting: Pray you bid
These unknown friends to's welcome, for it is
A way to make us better Friends, more known.
Come, quench your blushes, and present your self
That which you are, Mistress of the Feast. Come on,
And bid us welcome to your sheepe-shearing,
As your good flock shall prosper.

Sir, welcome:
It is my Fathers will, I should take on me
The Hostesseship of the day: you're welcome sir.
Give me those Flowers there (Dorcas.) Reverend Sirs,
For you, there is Rosemary, and Rue, these keep
Seeming, and savor all the Winter long:
Grace, and Remembrance be to you both,
And welcome to our Shearing.

Shepherdess,
(A fair one are you:) well you fit our ages
With flowers of Winter.

Sir, the year growing ancient,
Not yet on summers death, nor on the birth
Of trembling winter, the fairest flowers of th season
Are our Carnations, and streaked Gilly-vors,
(Which some call Natures bastards) of that kind
Our rusticke Gardens barren, and I care not
To get slips of them.

Wherefore (gentle Maiden)
Do you neglect them.

For I have heard it said,
There is an Art, which in their pidenesse shares
With great creating-Nature.

Say there be:
Yet Nature is made better by no mean,
But Nature makes that Mean: so over that Art,
(Which you say adds to Nature) is an Art
That Nature makes: you see (sweet Maid) we marry
A gentler Sien, to the wildest Stock,
And make conceive a bark of baser kind
By bud of Nobler race. This is an Art
Which does mend Nature: change it rather, but
The Art it self, is Nature.

So it is.


Then make you Garden rich in Gilly'vors,
And do not call them bastards.

I Will not put
The Dible in earth, to set one slip of them:
No more then were I painted, I would wish
This youth should say it were well: and only therefore
Desire to breed by me. Here Is flowers for you:
Hot Lauender, Mints, Sauory, Mariorum,
The Mary-gold, that goes to bed with Sun,
And with him rises, weeping: These are flowers
Of middle summer, and I think they are given
To men of middle age. Y' are very welcome.

I should leave grasing, were I of your flock,
And only live by gazing.

Out alas:
You Would be so lean, that blasts of January
Would blow you through and through. Now my fa^st Friend,
I would I had some Flowers of th Spring, that might
Become your time of day: and yours, and yours,
That wear upon your Virgin-branches yet
Your Maiden-heads growing: O Proserpina,
For the Flowers now, that (frighted) thou let'st fall
From Dysses Wagon: Daffadils,
That come before the Swallow dares* and take
The winds of March with beauty: Violets (dim,
But sweeter then the lids of Juno's eyes,
Or Cytherea's breath) pale Prime-roses,
That dye unmarried, ere they can behold
Bright Phoebus in his strength (a Malady
Most incident to Maids:) bold Oxlips, and
The Crown Imperial: Lillies of all kinds,
(The Flowre-de-Luce being one.) O, these I lack,
To make you Garlands of) and my sweet friend,
To strew him over, and ore.

What? like a Coarse?


No, like a bank, for Love to lie, and play on:
Not like a Coarse: or if: not to be buried,
But quick, and in mine arms. Come, take your flours,
Me thinks I play as I have seen them do
In Whitso^-Pastorals: Sure this Robe of mine
Does change my disposition:

What you do,
Still betters what is done. When you speak (Sweet)
I Would have you do it ever: When you sing,
I Would have you buy, and sell so: so give Alms,
Pray so: and for the ord'ring your Affairs,
To sing them too. When you do dance, I wish you
A wave of th Sea, that you might ever do
Nothing but that: move still, still so:
And own no other Function. Each your doing,
(So singular, in each particular)
Crowns what you are doing, in the present deeds,
That all your Acts, are Queens.

O Doricles,
Your praises are too large: but that your youth
And the true blood which peepes fairly through't,
Do plainly give you out an unstained Sphepherd
With wisdom, I might fear (my Doricles)
You wooed me the false way.

I think you have
As little skill to fear, as I have purpose
To put you to it. But come, our dance I pray,
Your hand (my Perdita:) so Turtles pair
That never mean to part.

I Will swear for 'em.


This is the prettiest Low-borne Less, that ever
Ran on the greene-sord: Nothing she does, or seems
But smackes of something greater then her self,
Too Noble for this place.

He tells her something
That makes her blood look on it: Good sooth she is
The Queen of Curds and Cream.

Come on: strike up.


Mopsa must be your Mistress: marry Garlic to mend her kissing with.


Now in good time.


Not a word, a word, we stand upon our manners,
Come, strike up.

Pray good Shepherd, what fair Swain is this,
Which dances with your daughter?

They call him Doricles, and boasts himself
To have a worthy Feeding; but I have it
Upon his own report, and I believe it:
He looks like sooth: he says he loves my daughter,
I think so too; for never gazed the Moon
Upon the water, as he will stand and read
As 'twere my daughters eyes: and to be plain,
I think there is not half a kiss to choose
Who loves another best.

She dances fearly.


So she does any thing, though I report it
That should be silent: If young Doricles
Do light upon her, she shall bring him that
Which he not dreams of.

O Master: if you did but hear the Peddler at the door, you would never dance
again after a Tabor and Pipe: no, the Bag-pipe could not move you: he singes
several Tunes, faster then you will tell money: he vtters them as he had eaten
ballads, and all men's ears grew to his Tunes


He could never come better: he shall come in: I love a ballad but even too
well, if it be doleful matter merrily set down: or a very pleasant thing
indeed, and sung lamentably


He has songs for man, or woman, of all sizes: No Milliner can so fit his
customers with Gloves: he has the prettiest Loue-songs for Maids, so without
bawdrie (which is strange,) with such delicate burdens of Dildo's and Fadings:
Iump-her, and thump-her; and where some stretch-mouth'd Rascal, would (as it
were) mean mischief, and break a foul gap into the Matter, he makes the
maid to answer, Whoop, do me no harm good man: put's him off, slights him,
with Whoop, do me no harm good man


This is a brave fellow.


Beleeee me, thou talkest of an admirable conceited fellow, has he any
vnbraided Wares


He has Ribbons of all the colors in th Rainebow; Points, more then all the
Lawyers in Bohemia, can learnedly handle, though they come to him by the
gross: Inckles, Caddysses, Cambrickes, Lawnes: why he sings em over, as they
were Gods, or Goddesses: you would think a Smock were a shee-Angell, he so
chauntes to the sleeue-hand, and the work about the square on it


Prithee bring him in, and let him approach singing.


Forewarne him, that he use no scurrilous words in's tunes.


You have of these Pedlers, that have more in them, then youl'd think (Sister.)


I, good brother, or go about to think.

Lawne as white as driven Snow,
Cypress black as ere was Crow,
Gloves as sweet as Damask Roses,
Maskes for faces, and for noses:
Bugle-bracelet, Necke-lace Amber,
Perfume for a Ladies Chamber:
Golden Quoises, and Stomachers
For my Lads, to give their deers:
Pins, and poaking-stickes of steel.
What Maids lack from head to heel:
Come buy of me, come: come buy, come buy,
Buy Lads, or else your Lasses cry: Come buy.

If I were not in love with Mopsa, thou should take no money of me, but being
enthralled as I am, it will also be the bondage of certain Ribbons and Gloves


I was promised them against the Feast, but they come not too late now.


He has promised you more then that, or there be liars.


He has paid you all he promised you: 'May be he has paid you more, which will
shame you to give him again


Is there no manners left among maids? Will they wear their plackets, where
they should bear their faces? Is there not milking-time? When you are going to
bed? Or kill-hole? To whistle of these secrets, but you must be tittle-tatling
before all our guests? It Is well they are whispring: clamor your tongues, and
not a word more


I have done; Come you promised me a tawdry-lace, and a pair of sweet Gloves.


Have I not told thee how I was cozened by the way, and lost all my money.


And indeed Sir, there are Cozeners abroad, therefore it behooues men to be wary.


Fear not thou man, thou shall lose nothing here


I hope so sir, for I have about me many parcels of charge.


What have here? Ballads?


Pray now buy some: I love a ballet in print, a life, for then we are sure they
are true


Here Is one, to a very doleful tune, how a Usurers wife was brought to bed of
twenty money baggs at a burden, and how she longed to eat Adders heads, and
Toads carbonado'd


Is it true, think you?


Very true, and but a month old.


Bless me from marrying a Usurer.


Here Is the Midwiues name to it: one Mist. Tale-Porter, and five or six honest
Wives, that were present. Why should I carry lies abroad


'Pray you now buy it.


Come-on, lay it by: and let us first see more Ballads: We Will buy the other
things anon


Here Is another ballad of a Fish, that appeared upon the coast, on wensday the
fourscore of April, forty thousand fadom above water, and sung this ballad
against the hard hearts of maids: it was thought she was a Woman, and was
turned into a cold fish, for she would not exchange flesh with one that loved
her: The Ballad is very pitiful, and as true


Is it true too, think you.


Five Justices hands at it, and witnesses more then my pack will hold.


Lay it by too; another.


This is a merry ballad, but a very pretty one.


Let Us have some merry ones.


Why this is a passing merry one, and goes to the tune of two maids wooing a
man: there is scarce a Maid westward but she sings it: it is in request, I can
tell you


We can both sing it: if thou wilt bear a part, thou shall hear, it is in three
parts


We had the tune on it, a month ago.


I can bear my part, you must know it is my occupation: Have at it with you.


Get you hence, for I must go


Where it fits not you to know.


Whether?


O Whether?


Whether?


It becomes thy oath full well,
Thou to me thy secrets tell.

Me too: Le me go thither:

Or thou go to the Grange, or Mill,


If to either thou do ill,


Neither.


What neither?


Neither:


Thou have sworn my Love to be,


Thou have sworn it more to me.
Then whether go? Say whether?

We Will have this song out anon by our selves: My Father, and the Gent* are in
sad talk, and we will not trouble them: Come bring away thy pack after me,
Wenches I Will buy for you both: Peddler let us have the first choice; follow me
girls


And you shall pay well for 'em.


Will you buy any Tape, or Lace for your ^rpe?
My dainty Ducke, my deere-a?
Any Silk, any Thread, any Toys for your head
Of the news't, and fins't, fins't weare-a.
Come to the Peddler, Money's a medler,
That does utter all men's ware-a.

Master, there is three Carters, three Shepherds, three Neat-herds, three
Swine-herds yt have made themselves all men of hair, they call themselves
Saltiers, and they have a Dance, which the Wenches say is a gally-maufrey of
Gambols, because they are not in it: but they themselves are of the mind (if it
be not too rough for some, that know little but bowling) it will please
plentifully


Away: We Will none on it; here has been too much homely foolery already. I know
(Sir) we weary you


You weary those that refresh us: pray let us see these foure-threes of
Heardsmen


One three of them, by their own report (Sir,) has danced before the King:
and not the worst of the three, but iumpes twelve foot and a half by the
squire


Leave your prating, since these good men are pleased, let them come in: but
quickly now


Why, they stay at door Sir.


O Father, you will know more of that hereafter:
Is it not too far gone? It Is time to part them,
He Is simple, and tells much. How now (fair shepherd)
Your heart is full of something, that does take
Your mind from feasting. Sooth, when I was young,
And handed love, as you do; I was wont
To load my She with knackes: I would have ransackt
The Pedlers silken Treasury, and have powered it
To her acceptance: you have let him go,
And nothing matted with him. If your Less
Interpretation should abuse, and call this
Your lack of love, or bounty, you were straited
For a reply at least, if you make a care
Of happy holding her.

Old Sir, I know
She prizes not such trifles as these are:
The gifts she looks from me, are packt and locked
Up in my heart, which I have given already,
But not delivered. O hear me breath my life
Before this ancient Sir, whom (it should seem)
Has sometime loved: I take thy hand, this hand,
As soft as Doves down, and as white as it,
Or Ethyopians tooth, or the san'd snow, that is bolted
By the Northern blasts, twice ore.

What follows this?
How prettily the young Swain seems to wash
The hand, was fair before? I have put you out,
But to your protestation: Let me hear
What you profess.

Do, and be witness to it.


And this my neighbor too?


And he, and more
Then he, and men: the earth, the heavens, and all;
That were I crowned the most Imperial Monarch
Thereof most worthy: were I the fairest youth
That ever made eye swerue, had force and knowledge
More then was ever man's, I would not prize them
Without her Love; for her, employ them all,
Commend them, and condemn them to her service,
Or to their own perdition.

Fairly offered.


This shows a sound affection.


But my daughter,
Say you the like to him.

I cannot speak
So well, (nothing so well) no, nor mean better
By the par^erne of mine own thoughts, I cut out
The purity of his.

Take hands, a bargain;
And friends unknown, you shall bear witness to it:
I give my daughter to him, and will make
Her Portion, equal his.

O, that must be
IN th Virtue of your daughter: One being dead,
I shall have more then you can dream of yet,
Enough then for your wonder: but come-on,
Contract us fore these Witnesses.

Come, your hand:
And daughter, yours.

Soft Swain awhile, beseech you,
Have you a Father?

I have: but what of him?


Knows he of this?


He neither does, nor shall.


Me-thinkes a Father,
Is at the Nuptial of his son, a guest
That best becomes the Table: Pray you once more
Is not your Father grown incapeable
Of reasonable affairs? Is he not stupid
With Age, and altring Rheumes? Can he speak? hear?
Know man, from man? Dispute his own estate?
Lies he not bedridden? And again, does nothing
But what he did, being childish?

No good Sir:
He has his health, and ampler strength indeed
Then most have of his age.

By my white beard,
You offer him (if this be so) a wrong
Something vnfilliall: Reason my son
Should choose himself a wife, but as good reason
The Father (all whose joy is nothing else
But fair posterity) should hold some counsel
In such a business.

I yield all this;
But for some other reasons (my grave Sir)
Which it is not sit you know, I not acquaint
My Father of this business.

Let him know it.


He shall not.


Prithee let him.


No, he must not.


Let him (my son) he shall not need to grieve
At knowing of thy choice.

Come, come, he must not:
Mark our Contract.

Mark your divorce (young sir)
Whom son I dare not call: Thou art too base
To be acknowledge. Thou a Scepters heir,
That thus affects a sheepe-hooke? Thou, old Traitor,
I am sorry, that by hanging thee, I can
but shorten thy life one week. And thou, fresh piece
Of excellent Witchcraft, whom of force must know
The royal Fool thou coap'st with.

Oh my heart.


I Will have thy beauty scratcht with briers and made
More homely then thy state. For thee (fond boy)
If I may ever know thou do but sigh,
That thou no more shall never see this knacke (as never
I mean thou shall) we will bar thee from succession,
Not hold thee of our blood, no not our Kin,
Far then Deucalion off: (mark thou my words)
Follow us to the Court. Thou Churl, for this time
(Though full of our displeasure) yet we free thee
From the dead blow of it. And you Enchantment,
Worthy enough a Heardsman: yea him too,
That makes himself (but for our Honor therein)
Unworthy thee. If ever henceforth, thou
These rural Latches, to his entrance open,
Or hope his body more, with thy embraces,
I will devise a death, as cruel for thee
As thou art tender to it.

Even here undone:
I was not much a-fear'd: for once, or twice
I was about to speak, and tell him plainly,
The selfsame Sun, that shines upon his Court,
Hides not his visage from our Cottage, but
Looks on alike. Wilt please you (Sir) be gone?
I told you what would come of this: Beseech you
Of your own state take care: This dream of mine
Being now awake, I Will Queen it no inch farther,
But milk my Ewes, and weep.

Why how now Father,
Speak ere thou dyest.

I cannot speak, nor think,
Nor dare to know, that which I know: O Sir,
You have undone a man of fourscore three,
That thought to fill his grave in quiet: yea,
To dye upon the bed my father died,
To lie close by his honest bones; but now
Some Hangman must put on my shroud, and lay me
Where no Priest shouels-in dust. Oh cursed wretch,
That knew'st this was the Prince, and would adventure
To mingle faith with him. Undone, undone:
If I might dye within this hour, I have lived
To die when I desire.

Why look you so upon me?
I am but sorry, not affear'd: delaid,
But nothing altered: What I was, I am:
More straining on, for plucking back; not following
My leash unwillingly.

Gracious my Lord,
You know my Fathers temper: at this time
He will allow no speech: (which I do guess
You do not purpose to him:) and as hardly
Will he endure your sight, as yet I fear;
Then till the fury of his Highness settle
Come not before him.

I not purpose it:
I think Camillo.

Even he, my Lord.


How often have I told you 'twould be thus?
How often said my dignity would last
But till it were known?

It cannot fail, but by
The violation of my faith, and then
Let Nature crush the sides of th earth together,
And mar the feeds within. Lift up thy looks:
From my succession wipe me (Father) I
Am heir to my affection.

Be advised.


I am: and by my fancy, if my Reason
Will thereto be obedient: I have reason:
If not, my senses better pleased with madness,
Do bid it welcome.

This is desperate (sir.)


So call it: but it does fulfill my vow:
I needs must think it honesty. Camillo,
Not for Bohemia, nor the pomp that may
Be there at gleaned: for all the Sun sees, or
The close earth wombes, or the profound seas, hides
In unknown fadomes, will I break my oath
To this my fair beloved: Therefore, I pray you,
As you have ever bin my Fathers honored friend,
When he shall miss me, as (in faith I mean not
To see him any more) cast your good counsels
Upon his passion: Let my self, and Fortune
Tug for the time to come. This you may know,
And so deliver, I am put to Sea
With her, who here I cannot hold on shore:
And most opportune to her need, I have
A Vessel rides fast by, but not prepared
For this design. What course I mean to hold
Shall nothing benefit your knowledge, nor
Concern me the reporting.

O my Lord,
I would your spirit were easier for advice,
Or stronger for your need.

Hark Perdita,
I Will hear you by and by.

He Is irremoueable,
Resolved for flight: Now were I happy if
His going, I could frame to serve my turn,
Save him from danger, do him love and honor,
Purchase the sight again of dear Sicillia,
And that unhappy King, my Master, whom
I so much thirst to see.

Now good Camillo,
I am so fraught with curious business, that
I leave out ceremony.

Sir, I think
You have heard of my poor services, in th love
That I have borne your Father?

Very nobly
Have you deserved: It is my Fathers Music
To speak your deeds: not little of his care
To have them recompensed, as thought on.

Well (my Lord)
If you may please to think I love the King,
And through him, what is nearest to him, which is
Your gracious self; embrace but my direction,
If your more ponderous and settled project
May suffer alteration. On mine honor,
I Will point you where you shall have such receiving
As shall become your Highness, where you may
Enjoy your Mistress; from the whom, I see
There Is no disjunction to be made, but by
(As heavens forefend) your ruin: Marry her,
And with my best endeavors, in your absence,
Your discontenting Father, strive to qualify
And bring him up to liking.

How Camillo
May this (almost a miracle) be done?
That I may call thee something more then man,
And after that trust to thee.

Have you thought on
A place whereto you will go?

Not any yet:
But as the vnthought-on accident is guilty
To what we wildely do, so we profess
Our selves to be the slaves of chance, and flies
Of every wind that blows.

Then lift to me:
This follows, if you will not change your purpose
But undergo this flight; make for Sicillia,
And there present your self, and your fair Princess,
(For so I see she must be) before Leontes;
She shall be habited, as it becomes
The partner of your Bed. Me thinks I see
Leontes opening his free Arms, and weeping
His Welcomes forth: asks thee there Son forgiveness,
As 'twere in the Fathers person: kisses the hands
Of your fresh Princess; ore and ore diuides him,
'Twixt his unkindness, and his Kindness: the one
He chides to Hell, and bids the other grow
Faster then Thought, or Time.

Worthy Camillo,
What color for my Visitation, shall I
Hold up before him?

Sent by the King your Father
To greet him, and to give him comforts. Sir,
The manner of your bearing toward him, with
What you (as from your Father) shall deliver,
Things known betwixt us three, I Will write you down,
The which shall point you forth at every sitting
What you must say: that he shall not perceive,
But that you have your Fathers Bosom there,
And speak his very Heart.

I am bound to you:
There is some sap in this.

A Course more promising,
Then a wild dedication of your selves
To vnpath'd Waters, vndream'd Shores; most certain,
To Miseries enough: no hope to help you,
But as you shake off one, to take another.
Nothing so certain, as your Anchors, who
Do their best office, if they can but stay you,
Where you will be loath to be: besides you know,
Prosperitie's the very bond of Love,
Whose fresh complexion, and whose heart together,
Affliction alters.

One of these is true:
I think Affliction may subdue the Cheek,
But not take-in the Mind.

Yea? say you so?
There shall not, at your Fathers House, these seven years
Be borne another such.

My good Camillo,
She Is as forward, of her Breeding, as
She is in the reare' our Birth.

I cannot say, it is pity
She lacks Instructions, for she seems a Mistress
To most that teach.

Your pardon Sir, for this,
I Will blush you Thanks.

My prettiest Perdita.
But O, the Thorns we stand upon: (Camillo)
Preserver of my Father, now of me,
The Medicine of our House: how shall we do?
We are not furnished like Bohemia's Son,
Nor shall appear in Sicilia.

My Lord,
Fear none of this: I think you know my fortunes
Do all lie there: it shall be so my care,
To have you royally appointed, as if
The Scene you play, were mine. For instance Sir,
That you may know you shall not want: one word.

Ha, ha, what a Fool Honesty is? and Trust (his sworn brother) a very simple
Gentleman. I have sold all my Tromperie: not a counterfeit Stone, not a Ribbon,
Glass, Pomander, Browch, Table-booke, Ballad, Knife, Tape, Glove, Shooe-tye,
Bracelet, Horne-Ring, to keep my Pack from fasting: they throng who should buy
first, as if my Trinkets had been hallowed, and brought a benediction to the
buyer: by which means, I saw whose Purse was best in Picture; and what I saw,
to my good use, I remembered. My Clown (who wants but something to be a
reasonable man) grew so in love with the Wenches Song, that he would not
stir his Petty-toes, till he had both Tune and Words, which so drew the rest
of the Heard to me, that all their other Senses stuck in Ears: you might have
pinched a Placket, it was senseless; 'twas nothing to gueld a Cod-peece of a
Purse: I would have filled Keys of that hung in Chains: no hearing, no
feeling, but my Sirs Song, and admiring the Nothing of it. So that in this time
of Lethargy, I pickd and cut most of their Festival Purses: And had not the
old man come in with a Whoo-bub against his Daughter, and the Kings Son, and
scared my Chowghes from the Chafe, I had not left a Purse alive in the whole
Army


Nay, but my Letters by this means being there
So soon as you arrive, shall clear that doubt.

And those that you will procure from King Leontes?


Shall satisfy your Father.


Happy be you:
All that you speak, shows fair.

Who have we here?
We Will make an Instrument of this: omit
Nothing may give us aid.

If they have ouer-heard me now: why hanging.


How now (good Fellow)
Why shak'st thou so? Fear not (man)
Here Is no harm intended to thee.

I am a poor Fellow, Sir.


Why, be so still: here is no body will steal that from thee: yet for the
outside of thy poverty, we must make an exchange; therefore dis-case thee
instantly (thou must think there is a necessity in it) and change Garments with
this Gentleman: Though the pennyworth (on his side) be the worst, yet hold
thee, there is some boot


I am a poor Fellow, Sir: (I know ye well enough.)


Nay prithee dispatch: the Gentleman is half fled already.


Are you in earnest, Sir? (I smell the trick on it.)


Dispatch, I prithee.


Indeed I have had Earnest, but I cannot with conscience take it.


Unbuckle, unbuckle.
Fortunate Mistress (let my prophecy
Come home to ye:) you must retire your self
Into some Covert; take your sweet-hearts Hat
And pluck it ore your Brows, muffle your face,
Dis-mantle you, and (as you can) disliken
The truth of your own seeming, that you may
(For I do fear eyes over) to Ship-boord
Get vndescry'd.

I see the Play so lies,
That I must bear a part.

No remedy:
Have you done there?

Should I now meet my Father,
He would not call me Son.

Nay, you shall have no Hat:
Come Lady, come: Farewell (my friend.)

Adieu, Sir.


O Perdita: what have we twain forgot?
'Pray you a word.

What I do next, shall be to tell the King
Of this escape, and whither they are bound;
Wherein, my hope is, I shall so prevail
To force him after: in whose company
I shall re-view Sicilia; for whose sight,
I have a Woman's Longing.

Fortune speed us:
Thus we set on (Camillo) to the Seaside.

The swifter speed, the better.


I understand the business, I hear it: to have an open ear, a quick eye, and
a nimble hand, is necessary for a Cutpurse; a good Nose is requisite also, to
smell out work for the other Senses. I see this is the time that the unjust
man does thrive. What an exchange had this been, without boot? What a boot is
here, with this exchange? Sure the Gods do this year conniue at us, and we
may do any thing extempore. The Prince himself is about a piece of Iniquity
(stealing away from his Father, with his Clog at his heels:) if I thought it
were a piece of honesty to acquaint the King withal, I would not do it: I hold
it the more knauerie to conceal it; and therein am I constant to my Profession

Aside, aside, here is more matter for a hot brain: Every Lanes end, every
Shop, Church, Session, Hanging, yields a careful man work


See, see: what a man you are now? there is no other way, but to tell the King
she is a Changeling, and none of your flesh and blood


Nay, but hear me.


Nay; but hear me.


Go too then.


She being none of your flesh and blood, your flesh and blood has not offended
the King, and so your flesh and blood is not to be punished by him. Show those
things you found about her (those secret things, all but what she has with
her:) This being done, let the Law go whistle: I warrant you


I will tell the King all, every word, yea, and his Sons prancks too; who, I
may say, is no honest man, neither to his Father, nor to me, to go about to
make me the Kings Brother in Law


Indeed Brother in Law was the farthest off you could have been to him, and
then your Blood had been the dearer, by I know how much an ounce


Very wisely (Puppies.)


Well: let us to the King: there is that in this Farthell, will make him
scratch his Beard


I know not what impediment this Complaint may be to the flight of my Master.


'Pray heartily he be at' Palace.


Though I am not naturally honest, I am so sometimes by chance: Let me pocket
up my Pedlers excrement. How now (Rustiques) whither are you bound


To the Palace (and it like your Worship.)


Your Affairs there? what? with whom? the Condition of that Farthell? the
place of your dwelling? your names? your ages? of what having? breeding, and
any thing that is fitting to be known, discover


We are but plain fellows, Sir.


A Lie; you are rough, and hayrie: Let me have no lying; it becomes none but
Tradesmen, and they often give us (Soldiers) the Lie, but we pay them for it
with stamped Coin, not stabbing Steel, therefore they do not give us the Lie


Your Worship had like to have given us one, if you had not taken your self
with the manner


Are you a Courtier, and't like you Sir?


Whether it lke me, or no, I am a Courtier. See thou not the air of the
Court, in these enfoldings? Has not my gate in it, the measure of the Court?
Receives not thy Nose Court-Odour from me? Reflect I not on thy Baseness,
Court-Contempt? Think thou, for that I insinuate, at toaze from thee thy
Business, I am therefore no Courtier? I am Courtier Cap-a-pe; and one that
will either push-on, or pluck-back, thy Business there: whereupon I command
thee to open thy Affair


My Business, Sir, is to the King.


What Advocate have thou to him?


I know not (and't like you.)


Aduocate's the Court-word for a Pheazant: say you have none.


None, Sir: I have no Pheazant Cock, nor Hen.


How blessed are we, that are not simple men?
Yet Nature might have made me as these are,
Therefore I will not disdain.

This cannot be but a great Courtier.


His Garments are rich, but he wears them not handsomely.


He seems to be the more Noble, in being fantastical: A great man, I Will
warrant; I know by the picking on's Teeth


The Farthell there? What Is in the Farthell? Wherefore that Box?


Sir, there lies such Secrets in this Farthell and Box, which none must know
but the King, and which he shall know within this hour, if I may come to the
speech of him


Age, thou have lost thy labor.


Why Sir?


The King is not at the Palace, he is gone aboard a new Ship, to purge
Melancholy, and air himself: for if thou be capable of things serious,
thou must know the King is full of grief


So it is said (Sir:) about his Son, that should have married a Shepherds
Daughter


If that Shepherd be not in hand-fast, let him fly; the Curses he shall have,
the Tortures he shall feel, will break the back of Man, the heart of Monster


Think you so, Sir?


Not he alone shall suffer what Wit can make heavy, and Vengeance bitter; but
those that are Iermaine to him (though removed fifty times) shall all come
under the Hangman: which, though it be great pity, yet it is necessary. An
old Sheepe-whistiing Rogue, a Ram-tender, to offer to have his Daughter come
into grace? Some say he shall be stoned: but that death is too soft for him
(say I:) Draw our Throne into a Sheep-Coat? all deaths are too few, the
sharpest too easy


Has the old man ere a Son Sir (do you hear) and't like you, Sir?


He has a Son: who shall be flayd alive, then 'noynted over with Honey, set
on the head of a Waspes Nest, then stand till he be three quarters and a dram
dead: then recouer'd again with Aquavite, or some other hot Infusion: then,
raw as he is (and in the hotest day Prognostication proclaymes) shall he be set
against a Brick-wall, (the Sun looking with a Southward eye upon him; where
he is to behold him, with Flies blown to death.) But what talk we of these
Traitorly-Rascals, whose miseries are to be smiled at, their offenses being so
capital? Tell me (for you seem to be honest plain men) what you have to the
King: being something gently considered, I Will bring you where he is aboard,
tender your persons to his presence, whisper him in your behalfes; and if it be
in man, besides the King, to effect your Suites, here is man shall do it


He seems to be of great authority: close with him, give him Gold; and though
Authority be a stubborn Be^re, yet he is often led by the Nose with Gold: show
the inside of your Purse to the outside of his hand, and no more ado.
Remember ^on'd, and stayed alive


And't please you (Sir) to undertake the Business for us, here is that Gold I
have: I Will make it as much more, and leave this young man in pawn, till I bring
it you


After I hate done what I promised?


I Sir.


Well, give me the Mo^: Are you a party in this Business?


In so^e s^rt, Sir: but though my case be a pitiful one, I hope I shall not
^s ^d out o^ it


Oh, that is the case (...) the Shepherds Son: hang him, he will be man a^
ex^le


Comfort ^ood co^. We must to the King, and she ^our strange sights: ^ ^st know
it is none of your Daugh^ ^ my (...) are gone else. Sir, I will give you as much
as this old man does when the Business i^ pe^s^ed, and remain (as he says)
your pawn till it be brough^ you


I will trust you. Walk before toward the Seaside, go on the right hand, I
will but look upon the Hedge, and follow you


We are blessed, in this man: as I may say, even blessed.


Let Us before, as he bids us: he was provided to do us good.


If I had a mind to be honest, I see Fortune would not suffer m^ ^sh^ d^s (...)
in my mouth. I am courted now with a double ^sion: (Gold, and a means to do
the Prince my Master ^od* which, who knows how that may turn back to (...)
^ncement?) I will bring these ^wo M^aie^, the ^d-ones, aboard him* if he think
it ^it to shore the again, and that the Complaint they have ^o (...) King*
concerns him nothing, let him call me Rog^e, ^o^ being (...) far officious,
for I am proof against that side, and what shame else belongs to it: To him
will I present them, there may be matter in it


Sir, you have done enough, and have performed
A Saint-like Sorrow: No fault could you make,
Which you have not redeemed; indeed paid down
More penitence* then done trespass: At the last
Do as the Heavens have done; forget your evil,
With them, forgive your self.

Whilst I remember
Her, and her Virtues, I cannot forget
My blemishes in them, and so still think of
The wrong I did my self: which was so much,
That Heire-lesse it has made my Kingdom, and
Destroyed the sweet'st Companion, that ere man
Bred his hopes out of true.

Too true (my Lord:)
If one by one, you wedded all the World,
Or from the All that are, took something good,
To make a perfect Woman; she you killed,
Would be vnparallell'd.

I think so. Killed?
She I killed? I did so: but thou strik'st me
Sorely, to say I did: it is as bitter
Upon thy Tongue, as in my Thought. Now, good now,
Say so but seldom.

Not at all, good Lady:
You might have spoken a thousand things, that would
Have done the time more benefit, and graced
Your kindness better.

You are one of those
Would have him wed again.

If you would not so,
You pity not the State, nor the Remembrance
Of his most Sovereign Name: Consider little,
What Dangers, by his Highness fail of Issue,
May drop upon his Kingdom, and deuou^e
Incertaine lookers on. What were more holy,
Then to rejoice the former Queen is well?
What holyer, then for Royalties repair,
For present comfort, and for future good,
To bless the Bed of Majesty again
With a sweet Fellow to it?

There is none worthy,
(Respecting her that is gone:) besides the Gods
Will have fulfilled their secret purposes:
For has not the Divine Apollo said?
Is It not the tenor of his Oracle,
That King Leontes shall not have an Heir,
Till his lost Child be found? Which, that it shall,
I^ all as monstrous to our humane reason,
As my Antigonus to break his Grave,
And come again to me: who, on my life,
Did perish with the Infant. It Is your council,
My Lord should to the Heavens be contrary,
Oppose against their wills. Care not for Issue,
The Crown will find an Heir. Great Alexander
Left his to the Worthiest: so his Successor
Was like to be the best.

Good Paulina,
Who have the memory of Hermione
I know in honor: O, that ever I
Had squared me to thy council: then, even now,
I might have looked upon my Queens full eyes,
Have taken Treasure from her Lips.

And left them
More rich, for what they yielded.

Thou speak truth:
No more such Wives, therefore no Wife: one worse,
And better used* would make her Sainted Spirit
Again possess her Corpse, and on this Stage
(Where we Offenders now appear) Soule-vext,
And begin, why to me?

Had she such power,
She had just such cause.

She had, and would incense me
To murder her I married.

I should so:
Were I the Ghost that walked, Il'd bid you mark
Her eye, and tell me for what dull part in it
You chose her: then Il'd shrieke, that even your ears
Should rift to hear me, and the words that followed,
Should be, Remember mine.

Stars, Stars,
And all eyes else, dead coals: fear thou no Wife;
I Will have no Wife, Paulina.

Will you swear
Never to marry, but by my free leave?

Never (Paulina) so be blessed my Spirit.


Then good my Lords, bear witness to his Oath.


You tempt him overmuch.


Unless another,
As like Hermione, as is her Picture,
Affront his eye.

Good Madame, I have done.


Yet if my Lord will marry: if you will, Sir;
No remedy but you will: Give me the Office
To choose you a Queen: she shall not be so young
As was your former, but she shall be such
As (walked your first Queens Ghost) it should take joy
To see her in your arms.

My true Paulina,
We shall not marry, till thou bidst us.

That
Shall be when your first Queene's again in breath:
Never till then.

One that gives out himself Prince Florizell,
Son of Polixenes, with his Princess (she
The fairest I have yet beheld) desires access
To your high presence.

What with him? he comes not
Like to his Fathers Greatness: his approach
(So out of circumstance, and sudden) tells us,
It Is not a Visitation framed, but forced
By need, and accident. What Train?

But few,
And those but mean.

His Princess (say you) with him?


I: the most peerless piece of Earth, I think,
That ere the Sun shone bright on.

Oh Hermione,
As every present Time does boast it self
Above a better, gone; so must thy Grave
Give way to what is seen now. Sir, you your self
Have said, and writ so; but your writing now
Is colder then that Theme: she had not been,
Nor was not to be equaled, thus your Verse
Flowed with her Beauty once; it is shrewdly ebbed,
To say you have seen a better.

Pardon, Madame:
The one, I have almost forgot (your pardon:)
The other, when she has obtayn'd your Eye,
Will have your Tongue too. This is a Creature,
Would she begin a Sect, might quench the zeal^
Of all Professors else; make Proselytes
Of who she but bid follow.

How? not women?


Women will love her, that she is a Woman
More worth then any Man: Men, that she is
The rarest of all Women.

Go Cleomines,
Your self (assisted with your honored Friends)
Bring them to our embracement. Still it is strange,
He thus should steal upon us.

Had our Prince
(Jewel of Children) seen this hour, he had payr'd
Well with this Lord; there was not full a month
Between their births.

'Prethee no more; cease: thou know
He dies to me again, when talk'd-of: sure
When I shall see this Gentleman, thy speeches
Will bring me to consider that, which may
Unfurnish me of Reason. They are come.
Your Mother was most true to Wedlock, Prince,
For she did print your Royal Father off,
Conceiving you. Were I but twenty one,
Your Fathers Image is so hit in you,
(His very air) that I should call you Brother,
As I did him, and speak of something wildly
By us performed before. Most dearly welcome,
And your fair Princess (Goddess) oh: alas,
I lost a couple, that 'twixt Heaven and Earth
Might thus have stood, begetting wonder, as
You (gracious Couple) do: and then I lost
(All mine own Folly) the Society,
Amity too of your brave Father, whom
(Though bearing Misery) I desire my life
Once more to look on him.

By his command
Have I here touched Sicilia, and from him
Give you all greetings, that a King (at friend)
Can send his Brother: and but Infirmity
(Which waits upon worn times) has something seized
His wished Ability, he had himself
The Lands and Waters, 'twixt your Throne and his,
Measured, to look upon you; whom he loves
(He bad me say so) more then all the Scepters,
And those that bear them, living.

Oh my Brother,
(Good Gentleman) the wrongs I have done thee, stir
Afresh within me: and these thy offices
(So rarely kind) are as Interpreters
Of my behind-hand slacknesse. Welcome hither,
As is the Spring to the Earth. And has he too
Exposed this Paragon to the fearful usage
(At least ungentle) of the dreadful Neptune,
To greet a man, not worth her pains; much less,
The adventure of her person?

Good my Lord,
She came from Libia.

Where the Warlike Smalus,
That Noble honored Lord, is feared, and loved?

Most Royal Sir,
From thence: from him, whose Daughter
His Tears proclaym'd his parting with her: thence
(A prosperous South Wind friendly) we have crossed,
To execute the Charge my Father gave me,
For visiting your Highness: My best Train
I have from your Sicilian Shores dismissed;
Who for Bohemia bend, to signify
Not only my success in Libia (Sir)
But my arrival, and my Wifes, in safety
Here, where we are.

The blessed Gods
Purge all Infection from our Air, whilst you
Do Clymate here: you have a holy Father,
A graceful Gentleman, against whose person
(So sacred as it is) I have done sin,
For which, the Heavens (taking angry note)
Have left me Issue-lesse: and your Father's blessed
(As he from Heaven merits it) with you,
Worthy his goodness. What might I have been,
Might I a Son and Daughter now have looked on,
Such goodly things as you?

Most Noble Sir,
That which I shall report, will bear no credit,
Were not the proof so nigh. Please you (great Sir)
Bohemia greets you from himself, by me:
Desires you to attach his Son, who has
(His Dignity, and Duty both cast off)
Fled from his Father, from his Hopes, and with
A Shepherds Daughter.

Where Is Bohemia? speak:


Here, in your City: I now came from him.
I speak amazedly, and it becomes
My marvel, and my Message. To your Court
Whiles he was hastening (in the Chase, it seems,
Of this fair Couple) meets he on the way
The Father of this seeming Lady, and
Her Brother, having both their Country quitted,
With this young Prince.

Camillo has betrayed me;
Whose honor, and whose honesty till now,
Endured all Weathers.

Lay't so to his charge:
He Is with the King your Father.

Who? Camillo?


Camillo (Sir:) I spoke with him: who now
Has these poor men in question. Never saw I
Wretches so quake: they kneel, they kiss the Earth;
Forswear themselves as often as they speak:
Bohemia stops his ears, and threatens them
With diverse deaths, in death.

Oh my poor Father:
The Heaven sets Spies upon us, will not have
Our Contract celebrated.

You are married?


We are not (Sir) nor are we like to be:
The Stars (I see) will kiss the Valleys first:
The odds for high and low's alike.

My Lord,
Is this the Daughter of a King?

She is,
When once she is my Wife.

That once (I see) by your good Fathers speed,
Will come-on very slowly. I am sorry
(Most sorry) you have broken from his liking,
Where you were tied in duty: and as sorry,
Your Choice is not so rich in Worth, as Beauty,
That you might well enjoy her.

Dear, look up:
Though Fortune, visible an Enemy,
Should chase us, with my Father; power no jot
Has she to change our Loves. Beseech you (Sir)
Remember, since you owed no more to Time
Then I do now: with thought of such Affections,
Stop forth mine Advocate: at your request,
My Father will grant precious things, as Trifles.

Would he do so. I Would beg your precious Mistress,
Which he counts but a Trifle.

Sir (my Liege)
Your eye has too much youth in it: not a month
Before your Queen died, she was more worth such gazes,
Then what you look on now.

I thought of her,
Even in these Looks I made. But your Petition
Is yet vn-answer'd: I will to your Father:
Your Honor not o're-throwne by your desires,
I am friend to them, and you: Upon which Errand
I now go toward him: therefore follow me,
And mark what way I make: Come good my Lord.

Beseech you (Sir) were you present at this Relation?


I was by at the opening of the Farthell, heard the old Shepherd deliver the
manner how he found it: Whereupon (after a little amazedness) we were all
commanded out of the Chamber: only this (me thought) I heard the Shepherd
say, he found the Child


I would most gladly know the issue of it.


I make a broken delivery of the Business; but the changes I perceived in the
King, and Camillo, were very Notes of admiration: they seemed almost, with
staring on one another, to tear the Cases of their Eyes. There was speech in
their dumbness, Language in their very gesture: they looked as they had heard
of a World ^ansom'd, or one destroyed: a notable passion of Wonder appeared in
them: but the wisest beholder, that knew no more but seeing, could not say, if
the importance were I^y, or Sorrow; but in the extremity of the one, it must
needs be

Here comes a Gentleman, that happily knows more: The News, Rogero.


Nothing but Bon-fires: the Oracle is fulfilled: the Kings Daughter is found:
such a deal of wonder is broken out within this hour, that Ballad-makers
cannot be able to express it

Here comes the Lady Paulina's Steward, he can deliver you more. How goes it
now (Sir.) This News (which is called true) is so like an old Tale, that the
verity of it is in strong suspicion: Has the King found his Heir


Most true, if ever Truth were pregnant by Circumstance: That which you hear,
you will swear you see, there is such unity in the proofs. The Mantle of
Queen Hermiones: her Jewel about the Neck of it: the Letters of Antigonus
found with it, which they know to be his Character: the Majesty of the
Creature, in resemblance of the Mother: the Affection of Nobleness, which
Nature shows above her Breeding, and many other Evidences, proclayme her, with
all certainty, to be the Kings Daughter. Did you see the meeting of the two
Kings


No.


Then have you lost a Sight which was to be seen, cannot be spoken of. There
might you have beheld one Joy crown another, so and in such manner, that it
seemed Sorrow wept to take leave of them: for their Joy waded in tears. There
was casting up of Eyes, holding up of Hands, with Countenance of such
distraction, that they were to be known by Garment, not by Favor. Our King
being ready to leap out of himself, for joy of his found Daughter; as if that
Joy were now become a Loss, cries, Oh, thy Mother, thy Mother: then asks
Bohemia forgiveness, then embraces his Sonne-in-Law: then again worryes he
his Daughter, with clipping her. Now he thanks the old Shepherd (which stands
by, like a Weather-bitten Conduit, of many Kings Reigns.) I never heard of
such another Encounter; which lames Report to follow it, and vndo's description
to do it


What, 'pray you, became of Antigonus, that carried hence the Child?


Like an old Tale still, which will have matter to rehearse, though Credit be
asleep, and not an ear open; he was torn to pieces with a Bear: This
auouches the Shepherds Son; who has not only his Innocence (which seems
much) to justify him, but a Hand-kerchief and Rings of his* that Paulina
knows


What became of his Bark, and his Followers?


Wrackt the same instant of their Masters death, and in the view of the
Shepherd: so that all the Instruments which aided to expose the Child, were
even then loft, when it was found. But oh the Noble Combat, that 'twixt Joy and
Sorrow was fought in Paulina. She had one Eye declined for the loss of her
Husband, another elevated, that the Oracle was fulfilled: She lifted the
Princess from the Earth, and so locks her in embracing, as if she would pin
her to her heart, that she might no more be in danger of loosing


The Dignity of this Act was worth the audience of Kings and Princes, for by
such was it acted


One of the prettyest touches of all, and that which angl'd for mine Eyes
(caught the Water, though not the Fish) was, when at the Relation of the
Queens death (with the manner how she came to it bravely confessed, and
lamented by the King) how attentiveness wounded his Daughter, till (from one
sign of dolor to another) she did (with an Alas) I would feign say, bleed
Tears; for I am sure, my heart wept blood. Who was most Marble, there changed
color: some swownded, all sorrowed: if all the World could have seen't, the
Woe had been universal


Are they returned to the Court?


No: The Princess hearing of her Mothers Statue (which is in the keeping of
Paulina) a Piece many years in doing, and now newly performed, by that rare
Italian Master, Iulio Romaeno, who (had he himself Eternity, and could put
Breath into his Work) would beguile Nature of her Custom, so perfectly he is
her Ape: He so near to Hermione, has done Hermione, that they say one would
speak to her, and stand in hope of answer. Thither (with all greediness of
affection) are they gone, and there they intend to Sup


I thought she had some great matter there in hand, for she has privately,
twice or thrice a day, ever since the death of Hermione, visited that removed
House. Shall we thither, and with our company piece the Rejoicing


Who would be thence, that has the benefit of Access? every wink of an Eye,
some new Grace will be borne: our Absence makes us unthrifty to our Knowledge.
Let Us along


Now (had I not the dash of my former life in me) would Preferment drop on my
head. I brought the old man and his Son aboard the Prince; told him, I heard
them talk of a Farthell, and I know not what: but he at that time ouer-fond of
the Shepherds Daughter (so he then took her to be) who began to be much
Sea-sick, and himself little better, extremity of Weather continuing, this
Mystery remained vndiscouer'd. But it is all one to me: for had I been the
finder-out of this Secret, it would not have rellish'd among my other
discredits

Here come those I have done good to against my will, and already appearing in
the blossoms of their Fortune


Come Boy, I am past more Children: but thy Sons and Daughters will be all
Gentlemen borne


You are well met (Sir.) you denied to fight with me this other day, because I
was no Gentleman borne. See you these Clothes? say you see them not, and think
me still no Gentleman borne: You were best say these Robes are not Gentlemen
borne. Give me the Lie: do: and try whether I am not now a Gentleman borne


I know you are now (Sir) a Gentleman borne.


I, and have been so any time these four hours.


And so have I, Boy.


So you have: but I was a Gentleman borne before my Father: for the Kings Son
took me by the hand, and called me Brother: and then the two Kings called my
Father Brother: and then the Prince (my Brother) and the Princess (my Sister)
called mv Father, Father; and so we wept: and there was the first
Gentleman-like tears that ever we shed


We may live (Son) to shed many more.


I: or else 'twere hard luck, being in so p^eposterous estate as we are.


I humbly beseech you (Sir) to pardon me all the faults I have committed to
your Worship, and to give me your good report to the Prince my Master


'Prethee Son do: for we must be gentle, now we are Gentlemen.


Thou will amend thy life?


I, and it like your good Worship.


Give me thy hand: I will swear to the Prince, thou art as honest a true
Fellow as any is in Bohemia


You may say it, but not swear it.


Not swear it, now I am a Gentleman? Let Boores and Francklins say it, I Will
swear it


How if it be false (Son?)


If it be never so false, a true Gentleman may swear it, in the behalf of his
Friend: And I Will swear to the Prince* thou art a tall Fellow of thy hands, and
that thou will not be drunk: but I know thou art no tall Fellow of thy hands,
and that thou will be drunk: but I Will swear it, and I would thou would be a
tall Fellow of thy hands


I will prove so (Sir) to my power.


I, by any means prove a tall Fellow: if I do not wonder, how thou dare
venture to be drunk, not being a tall Fellow, trust me not. Hark, the Kings
and the Princes (our Kindred) are going to see the Queens Picture. Come,
follow us: we will be thy good Masters


O grave and good Paulina, the great comfort
That I have had of thee?

What (Sovereign Sir)
I did not well, I meant well: all my Services
You have paid home. But that you have vouchsafed
(With your Crowned Brother, and these your contracted
Heirs of your Kingdoms) my poor House to visit;
It is a surplus of your Grace, which never
My life may last to answer.

O Paulina,
We honor you with trouble: but we came
To see the Statue of our Queen. Your Gallerie
Have we passed through, not without much content
In many singularities; but we saw not
That which my Daughter came to look upon,
The Statue of her Mother.

As she lived peerless,
So her dead likeness I do well believe
Excells what ever yet you looked upon,
Or hand of Man has done: therefore I keep it
Lovely, apart. But here it is: prepare
To see the Life as lively mocked, as ever
Still Sleep mocked Death: behold, and say it is well.
I like your silence, it the more shewes-off
Your wonder: but yet speak, first you (my Liege)
Comes it not something near?

Her natural Posture.
Chide me (dear Stone) that I may say indeed
Thou art Hermione; or rather, thou art she,
In thy not chiding: for she was as tender
As Infancy, and Grace. But yet (Paulina)
Hermione was not so much wrinckled, nothing
So aged as this seems.

Oh, not by much.


So much the more our Caruers excellence.
Which lets goe-by some sixteen years, and makes her
As she lived now.

As now she might have done,
So much to my good comfort, as it is
Now piercing to my Soul. Oh, thus she stood,
Even with such Life of Majesty (warm Life,
As now it coldly stands) when first I wooed her.
I am ashamed: Does not the Stone rebuke me,
For being more Stone then it? Oh Royal Piece:
There Is Magic in thy Majesty, which has
My Evils coniur'd to remembrance; and
From thy admiring Daughter took the Spirits,
Standing like Stone with thee.

And give me leave,
And do not say it is Superstition, that
I kneel, and then implore her Blessing. Lady,
Dear Queen, that ended when I but began,
Give me that hand of yours, to kiss.

O, patience:
The Statue is but newly fixed; the Colour's
Not dry.

My Lord, your Sorrow was too sore lay'd-on,
Which sixteen Winters cannot blow away,
So many Summers dry: scarce any Joy
Did ever so long live; no Sorrow,
But killed it self much sooner.

Dear my Brother,
Let him, that was the cause of this, have power
To take-off so much grief from you, as he
Will piece up in himself.

Indeed my Lord,
If I had thought the sight of my poor Image
Would thus have wrought you (for the Stone is mine)
Il'd not have showed it.

Do not draw the Curtain.


No longer shall you gaze on it, least your Fancy
May think anon, it moves.

Let be, let be:
Would I were dead, but that me thinks already.
(What was he that did make it?) See (my Lord)
Would you not deem it breathed? and that those veins
Did verily bear blood?

'Masterly done:
The very Life seems warm upon her Lip.

The fixure of her Eye has motion in it,
As we are mocked with Art.

I Will draw the Curtain:
My Lord's almost so far transported, that
He Will think anon it lives.

Oh sweet Paulina,
Make me to think so twenty years together:
No settled Senses of the World can match
The pleasure of that madness. Let't alone.

I am sorry (Sir) I have thus far stirred you: but
I could afflict you farther.

Do Paulina:
For this Affliction has a taste as sweet
As any Cordial comfort. Still me thinks
There is an air comes from her. What fine Chizzell
Could ever yet cut breath? Let no man mock me,
For I will kiss her.

Good my Lord, forbear:
The ruddinesse upon her Lip, is wet:
You Will mar it, if you kiss it; stayne your own
With Oily Painting: shall I draw the Curtain.

No: not these twenty years.


So long could I
Stand-by, a looker-on.

Either forbear,
Quit presently the Chapel, or resolve you
For more amazement: if you can behold it,
I Will make the Statue move indeed; descend,
And take you by the hand: but then you will think
(Which I protest against) I am assisted
By wicked Powers.

What you can make her do,
I am content to look on: what to speak,
I am content to hear: for it is as easy
To make her speak, as move.

It is required
You do awake your Faith: then, all stand still:
On: those that think it is unlawful Business
I am about, let them depart.

Proceed:
No foot shall stir.

Music; awake her: Strike:
It Is time: descend: be Stone no more: approach:
Strike all that look upon with marvel: Come:
I Will fill your Grave up: stir: nay, come away:
Bequeath to Death your numnesse: (for from him,
Dear Life redeemes you) you perceive she stirs:
Start not: her Actions shall be holy, as
You hear my Spell is lawful: do not shun her,
Until you see her dye again; for then
You kill her double: Nay, present your Hand:
When she was young, you wooed her: now, in age,
Is she become the Suitor?

Oh, she is warm:
If this be Magic, let it be an Art
Lawful as Eating.

She embraces him.


She hangs about his neck,
If she pertain to life, let her speak too.

I, and make it manifest where she has lived,
Or how stolen from the dead?

That she is living,
Were it but told you, should be hooted at
Like an old Tale: but it appears she lives,
Though yet she speak not. Mark a little while:
Please you to interpose (fair Madam) kneel,
And pray your Mothers blessing: turn good Lady,
Our Perdita is found.

You Gods look down,
And from your sacred Viols pour your graces
Upon my daughters head: Tell me (mine own)
Where have thou bin preserved? Where lived? How found
Thy Fathers Court? For thou shall hear that I
Knowing by Paulina, that the Oracle
Gave hope thou wast in being, have preserved
My self, to see the issue.

There Is ttme enough for that,
Leaft they desire (upon this push) to trouble
Your joys, with like Relation. Go together
You precious winners all: your exultation
Partake to every one: I (an old Turtle)
Will wing me to some withered bough, and there
My Mate (that is never to be found again)
Lament, till I am lost.

O peace Paulina:
Thou should a husband take by my consent,
As I by thine a Wife. This is a Match,
And made betweene's by Vows. Thou have found mine,
But how, is to be questioned: for I saw her
(As I thought) dead: and have (in vain) said many
A prayer upon her grave. I Will not seek fair
(For him, I partly know his mind) to find thee
An honorable husband. Come Camillo,
And take her by the hand: whose worth, and honesty
Is richly noted: and here justified
By Us, a pair of Kings. Let Us from this place.
What? look upon my Brother: both your pardons,
That ere I put between your holy looks
My ill suspicion: This your Son-in-law,
And Son unto the King, whom heavens directing
Is troth-plight to your daughter. Good Paulina,
Lead us from hence, where we may leysurely
Each one demand, and answer to his part
Performed in this wide gap of Time, since first
We were disseuer'd: Hastily lead away.


